---
edit_url: "https://github.com/hisptz/unicef-apps-docs/blob/master/src/commonmark/en/content/bna/end-user-training.md"
revision_date: '2021-09-09'
tags:
- App version 1.2.2
- Utilisation
---

# Formations des utilisateurs finaux { #end-user-training } 

Parmi les tâches importantes qui doivent être prises en compte lors de la formation de l'utilisateur final figurent les rôles et responsabilités des différents utilisateurs appelés à utiliser l'application BNA. Ces rôles et responsabilités dépendent de deux facteurs : les activités de la personne et la localisation de l'utilisateur.

## Identifier la formation requise { #identify-required-training } 

The most common tasks required for BNA training will include, Data
analysis processing, preparing reports and other information products.
The development team should endeavour to work with stakeholders (MoH and
Unicef) to plan trainings that have an impact on the users.

App  maintenance - managing users, changes on indicators and data
elements.

## Élaborer des stratégies de formation { #develop-training-strategies } 

### Tests d'acceptation par l'utilisateur { #user-acceptance-testing } 

This training is aimed at field testing the features and functions of
the BNA app. The training can be organised into two categories of users,
administrators and end-users. The purpose is to gauge the ability of
users to interact with the app and use it for bna analysis.

### Formation des formateurs { #training-of-trainers } 

Part of the processes to build capacity for support and implementation
of BNA is putting in place a national core team. The ToT is aimed at
training and building the capacity of a national core team to support
BNA configuration and use at both national and lower levels.

A team of 5-10 professional staff should be identified, trained and
equipped to support the implementation.

### Ateliers et formation sur site { #workshops-and-onsite-training } 

1-2 workshops should be conducted in an effort to support bna
implementation. a) Workshop for indicator  identification and mapping,
b) Training and capacity building workshop during implementation.

 

Additionally, for lower levels such as facilities, on-site training
sessions should be conducted to facilitate hands-on exercises. The
on-site training sessions should be decentralized and preferably
conducted by the District Health Management Team (DHMT) in conjunction
with the MoH

### Mentorat et supervision de soutien { #mentorship-and-support-supervision } 

Six-monthly onsite support supervision and training should be planned
and conducted. This will help identify gaps in the bna implementation
process and generate actions.

## Matériels et résultats { #materials-and-outcomes } 

Materials for the bna implementation should be reviewed and developed by
the national core team. These may include the Implementation guide,
end-user and administrators guide. Were necessary, step-by-step guides
should also be developed to enhance the training sessions.

