---
revision_date: '2024-10-09'
tags:
- Usar
- DHIS core version 2.40
template: single.html
---

# O que é DHIS2? { #what_is_dhis2 } 

Depois de ler este capítulo, você será capaz de entender:

  - What is DHIS2 and what purpose it serves with respect to health
    information systems (HIS)?

  - What are the major technological considerations when it comes to
    deploying DHIS2, and what are the options are for extending DHIS2
    with new modules?

  - Qual é a diferença entre dados agregados e baseados em pacientes?

  - What are some of the benefits and challenges with using Free and
    Open Source Software (FOSS) for HIS?

## Fundo DHIS2 { #mod1_1 } 

DHIS2 is a tool for collection, validation, analysis, and presentation
of aggregate and patient-based statistical data, tailored (but not
limited) to integrated health information management activities. It is a
generic tool rather than a pre-configured database application, with an
open meta-data model and a flexible user interface that allows the user
to design the contents of a specific information system without the need
for programming. DHIS2 is a modular web-based software package built
with free and open source Java frameworks.

DHIS2 is open source software released under the BSD license and can be
obtained at no cost. It runs on any platform with a Java Runtime
Environment (JRE 7 or higher) installed.

DHIS2 is developed by the Health Information Systems Programme (HISP) as
an open and globally distributed process with developers currently in
India, Vietnam, Tanzania, Ireland, and Norway. The development is
coordinated by the University of Oslo with support from NORAD and other
donors.

The DHIS2 software is used in more than 40 countries in Africa, Asia,
and Latin America, and countries that have adopted DHIS2 as their
nation-wide HIS software include Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Rwanda, Ghana,
Liberia, and Bangladesh. A rapidly increasing number of countries and
organisations are starting up new deployments.

The documentation provided herewith, will attempt to provide a
comprehensive overview of the application. Given the abstract nature of
the application, this manual will not serve as a complete step-by-step
guide of how to use the application in each and every circumstance, but
rather will seek to provide illustrations and examples of how DHIS2 can
be implemented in a variety of situations through generalized examples.

Before implementing DHIS2 in a new setting, we highly recommend reading
the DHIS2 Implementation Guide (a separate manual from this one), also
available at the main DHIS2 [website](http://dhis2.org/documentation/).

## Principais recursos e finalidade do DHIS2 { #key-features-and-purpose-of-dhis2 } 

Os principais recursos e a finalidade do DHIS2 podem ser resumidos da seguinte forma:

  - Provide a comprehensive data management solution based on data
    warehousing principles and a modular structure which can easily be
    customised to the different requirements of a management information
    system, supporting analysis at different levels of the
    organisational hierarchy.

  - Customisation and local adaptation through the user interface. No
    programming required to start using DHIS2 in a new setting (country,
    region, district etc.).

  - Provide data entry tools which can either be in the form of standard
    lists or tables, or can be customised to replicate paper forms.

  - Provide different kinds of tools for data validation and improvement
    of data quality.

  - Provide easy to use - one-click reports with charts and tables for
    selected indicators or summary reports using the design of the data
    collection tools. Allow for integration with popular external report
    design tools (e.g. JasperReports) to add more custom or advanced
    reports.

  - Flexible and dynamic (on-the-fly) data analysis in the analytics
    modules (i.e. GIS, PivotTables,Data Visualizer, Event reports, etc).

  - A user-specific dashboard for quick access to the relevant
    monitoring and evaluation tools including indicator charts and links
    to favourite reports, maps and other key resources in the system.

  - Easy to use user-interfaces for metadata management e.g. for
    adding/editing datasets or health facilities. No programming needed
    to set up the system in a new setting.

  - Funcionalidade para projetar e modificar fórmulas de indicadores calculados.

  - User management module for passwords, security, and fine-grained
    access control (user roles).

  - Messages can be sent to system users for feedback and notifications.
    Messages can also be delivered to email and SMS.

  - Users can share and discuss their data in charts and reports using
    Interpretations, enabling an active information-driven user
    community.

  - Functionalities of export-import of data and metadata, supporting
    synchronisation of offline installations as well as interoperability
    with other applications.

  - Using the DHIS2 Web-API , allow for integration with external
    software and extension of the core platform through the use of
    custom apps.

  - Further modules can be developed and integrated as per user needs,
    either as part of the DHIS2 portal user interface or a more
    loosely-coupled external application interacting through the DHIS2
    Web-API.

In summary, DHIS2 provides a comprehensive HIS solution for the
reporting and analysis needs of health information users at any
level.

## Uso do DHIS2 em HIS: coleta, processamento, interpretação e análise de dados. { #use-of-dhis2-in-his-data-collection-processing-interpretation-and-analysis } 

The wider context of HIS can be comprehensively described through the
information cycle presented in Figure 1.1 below. The information cycle
pictorially depicts the different components, stages and processes
through which the data is collected, checked for quality, processed,
analysed and used.


![The health information
cycle](resources/images/dhis2UserManual/dhis2_information_cycle.png)

DHIS2 suporta as diferentes facetas do ciclo de informações, incluindo:

  - Coletando dados.

  - Execução de verificações de qualidade.

  - Acesso a dados em vários níveis.

  - Comunicando.

  - Fazer gráficos e mapas e outras formas de análise.

  - Enabling comparison across time (for example, previous months) and
    space (for example, across facilities and districts).

  - See trends (displaying data in time series to see their min and max
    levels).

As a first step, DHIS2 serves as a data collection, recording and
compilation tool, and all data (be it in numbers or text form) can be
entered into it. Data entry can be done in lists of data elements or in
customised user defined forms which can be developed to mimic paper
based forms in order to ease the process of data entry.

As a next step, DHIS2 can be used to increase data quality. First, at
the point of data entry, a check can be made to see if data falls within
acceptable range levels of minimum and maximum values for any particular
data element. Such checking, for example, can help to identify typing
errors at the time of data entry. Further, user can define various
validation rules, and DHIS2 can run the data through the validation
rules to identify violations. These types of checks help to ensure that
data entered into the system is of good quality from the start, and can
be improved by the people who are most familiar with it.

When data has been entered and verified, DHIS2 can help to make
different kinds of reports. The first kind are the routine reports that
can be predefined, so that all those reports that need to be routine
generated can be done on a click of a button. Further, DHIS2 can help in
the generation of analytical reports through comparisons of for example
indicators across facilities or over time. Graphs, maps, reports and
health profiles are among the outputs that DHIS2 can produce, and these
should routinely be produced, analysed, and acted upon by health
managers.

## Formação técnica { #technical-background } 

### DHIS2 como plataforma { #dhis2-as-a-platform } 

DHIS2 can be perceived as a platform on several levels. First, the
application database is designed ground-up with flexibility in mind.
Data structures such as data elements, organisation units, forms and
user roles can be defined completely freely through the application user
interface. This makes it possible for the system to be adapted to a
multitude of locale contexts and use-cases. We have seen that DHIS2
supports most major requirements for routine data capture and analysis
emerging in country implementations. It also makes it possible for DHIS2
to serve as management system for domains such as logistics, labs and
finance.

Second, due to the modular design of DHIS2 it can be extended with
additional software modules or through custom apps. These software
modules/apps can live side by side with the core modules of DHIS2 and
can be integrated into the DHIS2 portal and menu system. This is a
powerful feature as it makes it possible to extend the system with extra
functionality when needed, typically for country specific requirements
as earlier pointed out.

The downside of the software module extensibility is that it puts
several constraints on the development process. The developers creating
the extra functionality are limited to the DHIS2 technology in terms of
programming language and software frameworks, in addition to the
constraints put on the design of modules by the DHIS2 portal solution.
Also, these modules must be included in the DHIS2 software when the
software is built and deployed on the web server, not dynamically during
run-time.

In order to overcome these limitations and achieve a looser coupling
between the DHIS2 service layer and additional software artefacts, a
REST-based API has been developed as part of DHIS2. This Web API
complies with the rules of the REST architectural style. This implies
that:

  - The Web API provides a navigable and machine-readable interface to
    the complete DHIS2 data model. For instance, one can access the full
    list of data elements, then navigate using the provided URL to a
    particular data element of interest, then navigate using the
    provided URL to the list of data sets which the data element is a
    member of.

  - (Meta) Data is accessed through a uniform interface (URLs) using
    plain HTTP requests. There are no fancy transport formats or
    protocols involved - just the well-tested, well-understood HTTP
    protocol which is the main building block of the Web today. This
    implies that third-party developers can develop software using the
    DHIS2 data model and data without knowing the DHIS2 2specific
    technology or complying with the DHIS2 design constraints.

  - All data including meta-data, reports, maps and charts, known as
    resources in REST terminology, can be retrieved in most of the
    popular representation formats of the Web of today, such as XML,
    JSON, PDF and PNG. These formats are widely supported in
    applications and programming languages and gives third-party
    developers a wide range of implementation options.

### Entendendo a independência da plataforma { #understanding-platform-independence } 

All computers have an Operating System (OS) to manage it and the
programs running it. The operating system serves as the middle layer
between the software application, such as DHIS2, and the hardware, such
as the CPU and RAM. DHIS2 runs on the Java Virtual Machine, and can
therefore run on any operating system which supports Java. Platform
independence implies that the software application can run on ANY OS -
Windows, Linux, Macintosh etc. DHIS2 is platform independent and thus
can be used in many different contexts depending on the exact
requirements of the operating system to be used.

Additionally, and perhaps most importantly, since DHIS2 is a browser-based
application, the only real requirement to interact with the system is
with a web browser. DHIS2 supports most web browsers, although currently
either Google Chrome, Mozilla Firefox or Opera are recommended.

### DHIS2 server hosting { #dhis2-server-hosting } 

Hosting DHIS2 on a national scale is a considerable undertaking which requires planning, provisioning, monitoring and management of potentially complex hardware and/or cloud resources.  For a full discussion of the various tradeoffs of different approaches see the [server hosting](#server-hosting) section of the DHIS2 implementation guide.

## Diferença entre dados agregados e dados do paciente em um HIS { #difference-between-aggregated-and-patient-data-in-a-his } 

*Patient data* is data relating to a single patient, such as his/her
diagnosis, name, age, earlier medical history etc. This data is
typically based on a single patient-health care worker interaction. For
instance, when a patient visits a health care clinic, a variety of
details may be recorded, such as the patient's temperature, their
weight, and various blood tests. Should this patient be diagnosed as
having "Vitamin B 12 deficiency anaemia, unspecified" corresponding to
ICD-10 code D51.9, this particular interaction might eventually get
recorded as an instance of "Anaemia" in an aggregate based system.
Patient based data is important when you want to track longitudinally
the progress of a patient over time. For example, if we want to track
how a patient is adhering to and responding to the process of TB
treatment (typically taking place over 6-9 months), we would need
patient based data.

*Aggregated data* is the consolidation of data relating to multiple
patients, and therefore cannot be traced back to a specific patient.
They are merely counts, such as incidences of Malaria, TB, or other
diseases. Typically, the routine data that a health facility deals with
is this kind of aggregated statistics, and is used for the generation of
routine reports and indicators, and most importantly, strategic planning
within the health system. Aggregate data cannot provide the type of
detailed information which patient level data can, but is crucial for
planning and guidance of the performance of health systems.

In between the two you have case-based data, or anonymous "patient"
data. A lot of details can be collected about a specific health event
without necessarily having to identify the patient it involved.
Inpatient or outpatient visits, a new case of cholera, a maternal death
etc. are common use-cases where one would like to collect a lot more
detail that just adding to the total count of cases, or visits. This
data is often collected in line-listing type of forms, or in more
detailed audit forms. It is different from aggregate data in the sense
that it contains many details about a specific event, whereas the
aggregate data would count how many events of a certain type, e.g. how
many outpatient visits with principal diagnosis "Malaria", or how many
maternal deaths where the deceased did not attend ANC, or how many
cholera outbreaks for children under 5 years. In DHIS2 this data is
collected through programs of the type single event without
registration.

Patient data is highly confidential and therefore must be protected so
that no one other than doctors can get it. When in paper, it must be
properly stored in a secure place. For computers, patient data needs
secure systems with passwords, restrained access and audit logs.

Security concerns for aggregated data are not as crucial as for patient
data, as it is usually impossible to identify a particular person to a
aggregate statistic . However, data can still be misused and
misinterpreted by others, and should not be distributed without adequate
data dissemination policies in place.

## Software Livre e de Código Aberto (FOSS): benefícios e desafios { #free-and-open-source-software-foss-benefits-and-challenges } 

Software carries the instructions that tell a computer how to operate.
The human authored and human readable form of those instructions is
called source code. Before the computer can actually execute the
instructions, the source code must be translated into a machine readable
(binary) format, called the object code. All distributed software
includes the object code, but FOSS makes the source code available as
well.

Proprietary software owners license their copyrighted object code to a
user, which allows the user to run the program. FOSS programs, on the
other hand, license both the object and the source code, permitting the
user to run, modify and possibly redistribute the programs. With access
to the source code, the users have the freedom to run the program for
any purpose, redistribute, probe, adapt, learn from, customise the
software to suit their needs, and release improvements to the public for
the good of the community. Hence, some FOSS is also known as free
software, where “free” refers, first and foremost, to the above freedoms
rather than in the monetary sense of the word.

Within the public health sector, FOSS can potentially have a range of
benefits, including:

  - Lower costs as it does not involve paying for prohibitive license
    costs.

  - Given the information needs for the health sector are constantly
    changing and evolving, there is a need for the user to have the
    freedom to make the changes as per the user requirements. This is
    often limited in proprietary systems.

  - Access to source code to enable integration and interoperability. In
    the health sector interoperability between different software
    applications is becoming increasingly important, meaning enabling
    two or more systems to communicate metadata and data. This work is a
    lot easier, and sometimes dependent on the source code being
    available to the developers that create the integration. This
    availability is often not possible in the case of proprietary
    software. And when it is, it comes at a high cost and contractual
    obligations.

  - FOSS applications like DHIS2 typically are supported by a global
    network of developers, and thus have access to cutting edge research
    and development knowledge.



# Usando o aplicativo de entrada de dados { #data_entry_app } 

## Sobre o aplicativo de entrada de dados { #about_data_entry_app } 

The **Data Entry** app is where you manually enter aggregated data in
DHIS2. You register data for an organisation unit, a period, and a set
of data elements (data set) at a time. A data set often corresponds to a
paper-based data collection tool. You configure the data sets in the
**Maintenance** app.

> **Note**
> 
> If a data set has both a section form and a custom form, the system
> displays the custom form during data entry. Users who enter data can't
> select which form they want to use. In web-based data entry the order
> of display preference is:
> 
> 1.  Custom form (if it exists)
> 
> 2.  Section form (if it exists)
> 
> 3.  Default form
> 
> Mobile devices do not support custom forms. In mobile-based data entry
> the order of display preference is:
> 
> 1.  Section form (if it exists)
> 
> 2.  Default form

When you close an organisation unit, you can't register or edit data to
this organisation unit in the **Data Entry** app.

## Insira dados em um formulário de entrada de dados { #enter_data_in_data_entry_form } 

![](resources/images/data_entry/data_entry_overview.png)

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Data Entry **.

2.  In the organisation unit tree to the left, select an organisation
    unit.

3.  Selecione um ** Conjunto de dados **.

4.  Selecione um ** Período **.

    The available periods are controlled by the period type of the data
    set (reporting frequency). You can jump a year back or forward by
    clicking **Prev year** or **Next year**.

    > **Note**
    > 
    > Depending on how you've configured the data entry form, you might
    > have to enter additional information before you can open the date
    > entry form. This can for example be a project derived from a
    > category combination.

5.  Insira os dados no formulário de entrada de dados.

      - Um campo verde significa que o sistema salvou o valor.

      - A grey field means that the field is disabled and you can't
        enter a value. The cursor will automatically jump to the next
        open field.

      - To move to the next field, press the Tab key or the Down Arrow
        key.

      - To move back to the previous field, press Shift+Tab or the Up
        Arrow key.

      - If you type in an invalid value, for example a character in a
        field that only accepts numeric values, you'll get a pop-up that
        explains the problem and the field will be coloured yellow (not
        saved) until you have corrected the value.

      - If you have defined a minimum maximum value range for the field
        and you enter a value that is outside this range, you'll get a
        pop-up message that says the value is out of range. The value
        remains unsaved until you've changed the value or updated the
        value range and then re-entered the value.

6.  When you've filled in the form, click **Run validation** in the top
    right corner or below the data entry form.

    All validation rules which involves data elements in the current
    data entry form (data set) are then run against the new data. If
    there are no violations of the validation rules, you'll see a
    message saying *The data entry screen successfully passed
    validation*. If there are validation violations, they will be
    presented in a list.

    ![](resources/images/dhis2UserManual/Validation_Rule_Result.png)

7.  (Opcional) Corrija as violações de validação.

    > **Note**
    > 
    > Zero (0) will delete the value if the data element has been
    > configured to not store zeros.

8.  When you've corrected errors and you're done with data entry, click
    **Complete**.

    The system uses this information when generating completeness
    reports for district, county, province or the national level.

## Marque um valor de dados para acompanhamento { #mark_data_for_followup_in_data_entry_form } 

![](resources/images/data_entry/data_entry_section_history.png)

If you for example have a suspicious value that you need to investigate
further, you can keep it the system, but mark it for follow-up. In the
**Data Quality** app you can then run a follow-up analysis to view and
correct all marked values.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Data Entry **.

2.  Abra um formulário de entrada de dados existente.

3.  Double-click the field with the value you want to mark for
    follow-up.

4.  Clique no ícone de estrela.

## Edite os valores dos dados em um formulário de entrada de dados preenchido { #edit_data_value_in_completed_form } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Data Entry **.

2.  Abra um formulário de entrada de dados existente.

3.  Clique em ** Incompleto **.

4.  Altere os valores de dados relevantes.

    > **Note**
    > 
    > Zero (0) will delete the value if the data element has been
    > configured to not store zeros,

5.  Clique em ** Complete **.

## Exibir o histórico de um valor de dados { #display_data_value_history } 

![](resources/images/data_entry/data_entry_section_history.png)

Você pode exibir os últimos 12 valores registrados para um campo.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Data Entry **.

2.  Abra um formulário de entrada de dados existente.

3.  Double-click the field with the value you want to view the history
    for.

4.  Clique em ** Histórico do elemento de dados **.

## Exibir trilha de auditoria do valor dos dados { #display_data_value_audit_trail } 

![](resources/images/data_entry/data_entry_audit_trail.png)

The audit trail allows you to view other data values which have been
entered prior to the current value. The audit trail also shows when the
data value was altered and which user who made the changes.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Data Entry **.

2.  Abra um formulário de entrada de dados existente.

3.  Double-click the field with the value you want to view the audit
    trail for.

4.  Clique em ** Trilha de auditoria **.

## Crie o intervalo de valor máximo mínimo manualmente { #change_min_max_range_manually } 

![](resources/images/data_quality/set_min_max_manually.png)

1.  No aplicativo ** Data Entry **, abra um formulário de entrada de dados.

2.  Double-click the field for which you want to set the minimum maximum
    value range.

3.  Insira ** Limite mínimo ** e ** Limite máximo **.

4.  Clique em **Salvar**.

    If values don't fall within the new value range the next time you
    enter data, the data entry cell will appear with an orange
    background.

5.  (Optional) Type a comment to explain the reason for the discrepancy,
    for example an event at a facility which may have generated a large
    number of clients.

6.  (Opcional) Clique em ** Salvar comentário **.

> ** Dica **
>
> Clique no ícone de estrela para marcar o valor para acompanhamento posterior.

## Insira os dados offline { #enter_data_offline } 

The **Data Entry** app works even if you don't have a stable Internet
connection during data entry. When you don't have an internet
connection, the data you enter is saved to your local computer. When the
Internet connection is back, the app will push the data to the server.
The total bandwidth usage is reduced since data entry forms no longer
are retrieved from the server for each rendering.

> **Note**
> 
> To use this functionality, you must login to the server while you've
> an Internet connection.

  - When you're connected to the Internet, the app displays this message
    at the top of the data entry form:

    ![](resources/images/data_entry/data_entry_online1.png)

  - If your Internet connection breaks during data entry, the app
    detects it and displays this message:

    ![](resources/images/data_entry/data_entry_offline1.png)

    Now your data will be stored locally. You can continue to enter data
    as normal.

  - Once you have entered all necessary data and the app detects that
    the Internet connection is back, you'll see this message:

    ![](resources/images/data_entry/data_entry_offline_upload.png)

    Clique em ** Upload ** para sincronizar os dados com o servidor.

  - When the data has successfully synchronized with the server, you'll
    see this confirmation
    message:

    ![](resources/images/data_entry/data_entry_offline_upload_success1.png)

## Habilitar entrada de dados de unidades multiorganizacionais { #data_entry_multiple_organisation_units } 

![](resources/images/data_entry/data_entry_multiple_org_unit.png)

It can be useful to enter data for multiple organisation units in the
same data entry form, for instance if there are few data elements in the
form and a huge number of organisation units in the hierarchy. In that
case, you can enable multi-organisation unit data entry.

> ** Nota **
>
> A entrada de dados de unidades multi-organizacionais só funciona para formulários de seção.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Configurações do sistema **.

2.  Selecione ** Habilitar formulários de unidade de várias organizações **.

3.  In the **Data Entry** app, select the organisation unit immediately
    above the organisation unit you want to enter data for in the
    organisation unit hierarchy.

    Data elements will appear as columns and organisation units as rows
    in the form.

    > **Note**
    > 
    > The data entry forms should still be assigned to the facilities
    > that you actually enter data for, that is the organisation units
    > now appearing in the form.

## Veja também { #data_entry_app_see_also } 

  - [Control data quality](#control_data_quality)

  - [Manage data sets and data entry forms](#manage_data_set)

  - [Using the Maintenance app](#maintenance_app)


# Data Entry (beta) app { #data-entry-beta-app } 

## About the Data Entry (beta) app { #aggregate_data_entry_app.about }

The Data Entry (beta) app is used to enter aggregate data in DHIS2. Aggregate data is collected at a group level and doesn't belong to any one individual. Looking to enter individual-level data? Check out the [Tracker Capture app](#tracker_capture_app).   

## What makes a data entry form? { #aggregate_data_entry_app.what_makes_a_form }

Data entry forms are filled in for a specific context, which is made up of the following choices:
1. **Data set** is a collection of data elements that represent the data you want to collect.
2. **Organisation unit** is where the data is being registered, which is often a location like a clinic, hospital, or classroom.
3. **Period** is when the data is from.
4. **Additional selections** are shown for some data entry forms and help to collect data into meaningful groups.

## Get to know the app { #aggregate_data_entry_app.get_to_know }

The Data Entry (beta) app is made up of a few different sections:

![](resources/images/data_entry_beta/app-layout.png)

1. **Top bar:** the top bar is where you choose from the different options to open a data entry form. You can always use the top bar to change or reset your choices.
2. **Data workspace**: the data workspace is where you work with a data entry form.
3. **Bottom bar**: the bottom bar offers actions and more information about the form you're working on.
4. **Details sidebar**: the details sidebar is where you can see more information about data values and see validation results. The details sidebar can be opened and closed as you work and is closed by default.


## Working with a data entry form { #aggregate_data_entry_app.working_with_a_form }

### Opening a form { #aggregate_data_entry_app.opening_a_form }

To get started with data entry, you need to open a form. Choose  the form you want to open using the top bar:
1. **Choose a data set** from the first control in the top bar. The dropdown menu shows the data sets that you have access to. The data set determines what other choices are available, so you have to choose a data set first.
2. **Choose an organisation unit** from the second control in the top bar. You can search for an organisation unit or browse the tree hierarchy.
3. **Choose a period** from the third control in the top bar. The dropdown menu shows the periods set up for the chosen data set. Choose from different years by clicking the left and right arrow buttons.
4. **Make additional selections**, if applicable. If there are any other selections available, they will be shown as the last controls in the top bar. Additional selections depend on the chosen data set, organisation unit, and period, so they won't be shown until those first three choices are made. If there aren't any additional selections then extra controls won't be shown.

After you've made the selections in the top bar, the data entry form will open in the data workspace. If there's a problem opening a form, the data workspace will show an error that explains the problem.

### Entering data { #aggregate_data_entry_app.entering_data }

Once you've opened a form, you can start entering data into the form cells. The active cell, the cell that you're entering data into, is always highlighted with a blue border. To work quickly, you can move around using your keyboard:
- to move on to the next cell, press ++tab++ or ++arrow-down++.
- to go back to the previous cell, press ++shift+tab++ or ++arrow-up++.

#### Cell status { #aggregate_data_entry_app.cell_status }
Cells look different depending on what their status is:

| Cell    | Status                                                                                                                                           |
| ------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| ![](resources/images/data_entry_beta/cell-normal.png)  | Showing a value that's already saved or a cell that's empty.                                                                                            |
| ![](resources/images/data_entry_beta/cell-synced.png)   | The cell value is saved on the server.                                                                                                                |
| ![](resources/images/data_entry_beta/cell-waiting.png) | The cell value is saved locally and is syncing, or waiting to sync, to the server.                                                                                              |
| ![](resources/images/data_entry_beta/cell-invalid.png)     | There's a problem with the cell value. Click or hover over the cell to learn more about the problem. These invalid values are not saved to the server or locally. |
| ![](resources/images/data_entry_beta/cell-comment.png) | The value has a comment.                                                                                                                         |
| ![](resources/images/data_entry_beta/cell-readonly.png)  | The cell is locked and the value can't be edited.                                                                                                                                                 |

### Filtering a form { #aggregate_data_entry_app.filtering }
Filtering is useful if you're looking for a certain cell in a form. You can filter the whole form, filter single sections, or both. Any cells that don't match the filter will be hidden.

#### Filtering the whole form form { #aggregate_data_entry_app.filtering_whole_form }

![](resources/images/data_entry_beta/filter-form.png){ width=60% }

To filter the whole data entry form, enter a value into the input at the top of the form.

#### Filtering a section { #aggregate_data_entry_app.filtering_section }

![](resources/images/data_entry_beta/filter-section.png){ width=60% }

For section forms you can also filter inside a single section. Enter a value into the input at the top of a section.

### Validation { #aggregate_data_entry_app.validation }
When you're done entering data you can run validation on the data values. Validation checks the values against rules set up by your DHIS2 instance. 

To run validation, click the *Run validation* button in the bottom bar. 

![](resources/images/data_entry_beta/validation-button.png){ width=60% }

The validation results are shown in the details sidebar, grouped into high, medium, and low priority results. Once you've fixed validation issues, click the *Run validation again* button to recheck data values.

![](resources/images/data_entry_beta/validation-results.png) 


### Completing a form { #aggregate_data_entry_app.completing }

After entering data and running validation, the last step is completing a form. Completing a form means that all the intended data has been entered and empty cells are intentionally left empty. Mark a form as complete by clicking the *Mark complete* button in the bottom bar.

![](resources/images/data_entry_beta/complete-button.png){ width=60% }

If a form is complete but shouldn't be, you can mark it as incomplete by clicking the *Mark incomplete* button in the bottom bar.

### Doing more with data values { #aggregate_data_entry_app.doing_more_with_data_values }

The basic data entry functionality is covered above, but the Data Entry (beta) app offers more actions and information. These actions and information are found in the data details sidebar that's shown on the right of the data workspace.

![](resources/images/data_entry_beta/data-details.png) 

#### Opening the data details sidebar { #aggregate_data_entry_app.opening_data_details_sidebar }

There are different ways to open the data details sidebar:
- **Click the *View details* button**. With a data entry cell selected, you can click the *View details* button in the bottom bar.
- **Use the ++ctrl+enter++ or ++cmd+enter++ keyboard shortcut**. With a data entry cell selected, use one of these keyboard shortcuts.

The data details sidebar will stay open until you close it so that you can keep it open for reference as you work through a data entry form.

#### Mark data values for follow-up { #aggregate_data_entry_app.mark_followup }

Marking data values for follow-up can be a useful way of highlighting suspicious or odd values that need to be investigated. Data values marked for follow-up will still be saved, but they will be highlighted in the **Data Quality** app for further investigation or analysis.

To mark a data value for follow-up, [make sure the data details sidebar is open](#aggregate_data_entry_app.opening_data_details_sidebar), then click the *Mark for follow-up* button in the top section.

![](resources/images/data_entry_beta/followup-button.png){ width=60% }

To unmark a data value, click the *Unmark for follow-up* button.

![](resources/images/data_entry_beta/followup-unmark-button.png){ width=60% }

#### Comment on a data value { #aggregate_data_entry_app.comments }

You can add a comment to any data value. Comments can be useful to add more information about a value, like noting reasons why a value is unusually high or out of the normal range.

To add a comment to a data value, [make sure the data details sidebar is open](#aggregate_data_entry_app.opening_data_details_sidebar), then click the *Add comment* button in the *Comment* section.

![](resources/images/data_entry_beta/comment-add-button.png){ width=50% }

Once you've written a comment, click the *Save comment* button.

If a data value already has a comment, you can edit it by clicking the *Edit comment* button below the comment.

![](resources/images/data_entry_beta/comment-edit-button.png){ width=50% }

#### Minimum and maximum limits { #aggregate_data_entry_app.limits}

A data value can have a minimum and maximum limit. These limits won't allow someone to enter values outside of the minimum or maximum. 

To add limits to a data value, [make sure the data details sidebar is open](#aggregate_data_entry_app.opening_data_details_sidebar), then click the *Add limits* button in the *Min and max limits* section. If possible, an average value will be shown to help you create reasonable limits.

![](resources/images/data_entry_beta/limits-add-button.png){ width=50% }

Once you've added a minimum and maximum limit, click the *Save limits* button.

If a data value already has limits set up, you can change them or remove them. To change the limits, click the *Edit limits* button. To remove the limits, click the *Delete limits* button.

![](resources/images/data_entry_beta/limits-edit-button.png){ width=50% }

> **Caution**
>
> Adding, changing, or removing limits requires the correct user privileges. When limits are applied to a data value, the same limits apply for everyone using same data set.

#### Historical data { #aggregate_data_entry_app.history }

To learn more about a data value, you can see the last twelve values in the *History* section of the data details sidebar. [Make sure the data details sidebar is open](#aggregate_data_entry_app.opening_data_details_sidebar), then open the *History* section

![](resources/images/data_entry_beta/value-history.png){ width=60% }

When working through a data entry form, the *History* section is closed by default to prevent too much network data from being sent for every value.

#### Audit log { #aggregate_data_entry_app.audit_log}

Every data entry cell has an audit log that shows when values were changed and who changed them. To see the audit log, [make sure the data details sidebar is open](#aggregate_data_entry_app.opening_data_details_sidebar), then open the *Audit log* section.

<!-- todo: add image when bug fixes merged -->

When working through a data entry form, the *Audit log* section is closed by default to prevent too much network data from being sent for every value.


### Printing { #aggregate_data_entry_app.printing }

To print a data entry form, click the *Options* button in the top bar. From the dropdown menu, you can choose to print the form including cell data values, or an empty form.

![](resources/images/data_entry_beta/print.png){ width=80% }

## Working offline { #aggregate_data_entry_app.working_offline }

You don't need to be connected to the internet or DHIS2 server to enter data. Data entered into forms while you are offline is saved to your local computer. When you reconnect to the internet/server your locally saved data automatically syncs with your DHIS2 server.

To work offline, you need to open the Data Entry (beta) app while you are connected to the internet so the data entry forms can be downloaded and stored on your local computer. Downloading of forms happens automatically in the background.

The badge in the header bar at the top of the screen shows your connection status. If you are not connected to the internet or DHIS2 server, the badge shows *offline*. As well as the offline badge, forms cells you enter data will show the *waiting to sync* status.

![](resources/images/data_entry_beta/offline.png){ width=60% }

> **Note**
>
> Some features aren't available when offline because they need contact with a DHIS2 server to work.  
> Validation, data value history, and data value audit logs aren't available offline.


## Features not supported in the beta version { #aggregate_data_entry_app.unsupported_features }

The **Data Entry (beta) app** is constantly evolving and new features are being added. There are some features that the previous Data Entry app offered that are supported yet:
- **Custom forms** don't support CSS/JS yet. We are currently examining the different ways custom forms are used in order to build a more sustainable, flexible solution.
- **Multi-organisation unit entry** isn't supported.

## Related information { #aggregate_data_entry_app.related_info }

- [Control data quality](#control_data_quality)
- [Manage data sets and data entry forms](#manage_data_set)
- [Using the Maintenance app](#maintenance_app)



# Controle de qualidade de dados { #control_data_quality } 

## Sobre verificações de qualidade de dados { #about_data_quality } 

The **Data Quality** app contains tools to validate the accuracy and
reliability of the data in the system. You can assess different dimensions of 
data quality as outlined in the table below: 


| Dimension | Descrição |
|---|---|
| Correctness | Data should be within the normal range for data collected at that facility. There should be no gross discrepancies when compared with data from related data elements. |
| Completeness | Data for all data elements for all reporting organisation units should have been submitted. |
| Consistency | Data should be consistent with data entered during earlier months and years while allowing for changes with reorganization, increased work load, etc. and consistent with other similar facilities. |
| Timeliness | All data from all reporting organisation units should be submitted at the appointed time. |

Você pode verificar a qualidade dos dados de diferentes maneiras, por exemplo:

  - At point of data entry, DHIS 2 can check the data entered to see if
    it falls within the minimum maximum value ranges of that data
    element (based on all previous data registered).

  - By defining validation rules, which can be run once the user has
    finished data entry. The user can also check the entered data for a
    particular period and organization unit(s) against the validation
    rules, and display the violations for these validation rules.

  - Ao analisar conjuntos de dados, ou seja, examine as lacunas nos dados.

  - By data triangulation, that is, comparing the same data or indicator
    from different sources.

## Análise de regra de validação { #validation_rule_analysis } 

### Sobre a análise da regra de validação { #about-validation-rule-analysis } 

A validation rule is based on an expression which defines a numeric relationship
between data element values. The expression forms a condition which
should assert that certain logical criteria are met.

A expressão consiste em:

  - um lado esquerdo

  - um lado direito

  - uma operadora

A validation rule could assert that "Suspected malaria cases tested" \>=
"Confirmed malaria cases".

The left and right sides must return numeric values.

The validation rule analysis tests validation rules against the data
registered in the system. Validation violations are reported when the
condition defined in the validation rule expression is not met, which
means when the condition is false.

You can configure a validation rule analysis to automatically send out
information about validation violations to selected user groups. These
messages are called *validation notifications* and you create them in
the **Maintenance** app. Validation notifications are sent via the
internal DHIS 2 messaging system.

### Fluxo de Trabalho { #workflow } 

1.  In the **Maintenance** app, create validation rules and validation
    rule groups.

2.  (Optional) In the **Maintenance** app, create validation
    notifications.

3.  Execute a análise da regra de validação, automática ou manualmente.

      - In the **Scheduler** app, you schedule the validation
        rule analysis to run automatically for all validation rules
        included in one or several validation rule groups. After the
        system has run the analysis, you'll see the validation
        violations (if any) in the validation notifications sent via the
        internal DHIS 2 messaging system.

      - In the **Data Quality** app, you run the validation rule
        analysis manually for selected validation rules. After the
        analysis process has finished, you'll see a list of validation
        violations (if any).

### Agende uma análise de regra de validação para ser executada automaticamente { #schedule-a-validation-rule-analysis-to-run-automatically } 

> **Note**
>
> Only validation rules that are included in one or several validation
> notifications will be a part of the validation rule analysis. If
> there is no corresponding validation notification for a validation
> rule, no notification will be sent.

> **Note**
>
> While running validation rule analysis automatically, any results not
> already persisted, will be persisted during this run. Persisted
> results can currently only be accessed trough the API. Consult
> the developers guide for more information about how persisted
> validation rule violations can be accessed.

1.  Verify that you have created all the validation rules, validation
    rule groups and validation notifications you need.

2.  Abra o aplicativo ** Scheduler ** e clique no botão Adicionar no canto inferior direito.

3.  Escolha um nome adequado para o novo trabalho.

4. Selecione o tipo de trabalho ** Monitoramento ** usando o menu suspenso.

5. Selecione uma frequência de execução para o trabalho, ou seja, quando e com que frequência o trabalho deve ser executado.

6. Preencha a seção ** Parâmetros **, incluindo os grupos de regras de validação.

7. Pressione o botão ** Adicionar trabalho ** para confirmar a criação do trabalho. Para obter mais informações sobre como adicionar tarefas, consulte [Scheduling] (data-Administration.html # scheduling).

### Execute uma análise de regra de validação manualmente { #run-a-validation-rule-analysis-manually } 

![](resources/images/data_quality/validation_rule_analysis.png)

1.  Verify that you have created all the validation rules, validation
    rule groups and validation notifications you need.

2.  Open the **Data Quality** app and click **Validation rule
    analysis**.

3.  Selecione ** Data de início ** e ** Data de término **.

4.  Select which **Validation rule group** you want to include in the
    análise.

    You can select all validation rules or all validation rules from a
    single validation rule group.

5.  (Optional) Select **Send notifications** to trigger validation
    notifications.

    > **Note**
    >
    > If you want to send out validation notifications, you must first
    > create them in the **Maintenance** app.

6.  (Optional) Select *Persist new results* to persist any non-persisted
    results found during the analysis

7.  Selecione uma ** Unidade organizacional principal **.

8.  Clique em ** Validar **.

    The analysis process duration depends on the amount of data that is
    being analysed. If there are no violations of the validation rules,
    you'll see a message saying *Validation passed successfully*. If
    there are validation violations, they will be presented in a
    list.

    ![](resources/images/data_quality/validation_rule_analysis_result.png)

9.  (Optional) Click the show details icon to get more information about
    a validation violation. In the pop-up window you'll find information
    about the data elements included in the validation rules and their
    corresponding data values. You can use this information to identify
    the source of the validation rule violation.

10. (Optional) Click **Download as PDF**, **Download as Excel** or
    **Download as CSV** to download the validation violations list in
    PDF, Excel or CSV formats.

### Veja também { #see-also } 

  - [Manage validation
    rules](https://docs.dhis2.org/master/en/user/html/manage_validation_rule.html)

  - [Data Administration
    app](https://docs.dhis2.org/master/en/user/html/data_admin.html)

## Outlier detection { #outlier_detection } 

### About outlier detection { #about-outlier-detection } 

The outlier detection tool identifies values which are
numerically distant from the rest of the data, potentially indicating that they are outliers.
The analysis is based on the standard normal distribution. DHIS 2 calculates the mean of
all values for an organisation unit, data element, category option
combination and attribute option combination.

> **Note**
>
>  As indicated above, this data quality analysis is only appropriate for 
>  data which is normally distributed. Data with large seasonal
>  variation, or which may be distributed according to other statistical models
>  (e.g. logistical ) may lead values being flagged which actually should be considered valid. 
>  It is therefore recommended to first confirm whether the data actually is normally 
>  distributed before running a standard deviation outlier analysis.

### Run outlier detection { #run-outlier-detection } 

![](resources/images/data_quality/std_dev_analysis.png)

1.  Open the **Data Quality** app and click **Outlier Detection**.

2.  Select one or multiple data sets.

3.  Select **Organisation units**.

    Multiple organisation units can be selected. The analysis is made on raw data for all organisation units in the sub-hierarchy of the selected units, not on aggregated data.

4.  Selecione ** Desde a data ** e ** Até a data **.

5.  Set the **Algorithm** to use. 

    **Z-score** (based on the mean of data values), **Modified Z-score** (based on the median of data values) and **Min-max values** (based on stored min-max data values) are available algorithms.

6. Select a **Threshold**.

   This refers to the number of standard deviations the data is allowed to deviate from the mean before it is classified as an outlier.

7. Select **Max results**.

   This refers to the maximum number of outliers listed in the results.

8. (Optional) Select a **Data start date** and **Data end date**

   These fields can be used to perform outlier detection analysis on a subset of the data within the provided date range. When left blank, the natural start and end date of the dataset will be used _(in advanced section)_.

9. (Optional) Select a measure to **Sort by**.

   The outliers can be sorted by **Z-score** or by **Absolute deviation from Mean** _(in advanced section)_.

10. Click **Start**
    The analysis process duration depends on the amount of data that is    being analysed. If there are standard deviations outliers, they will be presented in a list.
    ![](resources/images/data_quality/std_dev_analysis_outlier_result.png)
    For each outlier, you will see the data element, period, organisation unit, value, z-score, deviation, standard deviation, mean, min, and max. The minimum and maximum values refer to the border values derived from the number of standard deviations selected for the analysis.

11. (Optional) Click **Download as CSV** to download the list in CSV format.

> **Tip**
>
> Click the checkbox to mark an outlier value for further follow-up.

## Minimum maximum outlier detection { #min_max_outlier_detection } 

### About minimum maximum value based outlier detection { #about-minimum-maximum-value-based-outlier-detection } 

You can verify the data quality at the point of data entry by setting a
minimun/maximum value range for each data value. You can define the value
ranges manually or generate them automatically.

The auto-generated minimum maximum value range is suitable only for
normally distributed data. DHIS2 will determine the arithmetic mean and
standard deviation of all values for a given data element, category
option, organisation unit and attribute combination. Then the system
will calculate the minimum maximum value range based on the **Data
analysis std dev factor** specified in the **System Settings** app.

For data which is highly-skewed or zero inflated (as is often the case
with aggregate data), the values which DHIS2 auto-generates may not
provide an accurate minimum maximum value range. This can lead to
excessive false violations, for example if you analyse values related to
seasonal diseases.

> **Note**
>
> Minimum maximum value ranges are calculated across all attribute
> combination options for a given data element, category option and
> organisation unit combination.

### Fluxo de Trabalho { #workflow } 

1.  Create a minimum maximum value range, either automatically or
    manually.

      - In the **Data Administration** app, you generate value ranges
        automatically.

      - No aplicativo ** Data Entry **, você pode definir intervalos de valores manualmente.

2.  No aplicativo ** Data Quality **, execute a análise ** Min-max outlier **.

### Configure a minimum maximum outlier detection { #configure-a-minimum-maximum-outlier-detection } 

#### Criar intervalo de valor máximo mínimo automaticamente { #create-minimum-maximum-value-range-automatically } 

> **Note**
>
> Auto-generated minimum maximum value ranges can be useful for many
> situations, but it's recommended to verify that the data is actually
> normally distributed prior to using this function.

You generate minimum maximum value ranges calculated by data set in the
**Data Administration** app. The new value ranges override any value
ranges that the system has calculated previously.

1.  Defina o ** fator de desvio padrão da análise de dados (desvio padrão) **:

    1.  Abra o aplicativo ** System Settings ** e clique em ** General **.

    2.  No campo ** Fator de desenvolvimento padrão da análise de dados **, insira um valor.

        This sets the number of standard deviations to use in the
        outlier analysis. The default value is 2. Higher values
        indicate a broader distribution, which may lead to outliers
        not being flagged correctly by the analysis. 

2.  Abra o aplicativo ** Administração de dados ** e clique em ** Geração de valor mínimo-máximo **.

3.  Selecione o (s) conjunto (s) de dados.

4.  Selecione uma ** Unidade organizacional **.

5.  Clique em ** Gerar **.

    New minimum maximum value ranges for all data elements in the
    selected data sets for all organisation units (including
    descendants) of the selected organisation units are generated.

#### Criar intervalo de valor mínimo / máximo manualmente { #create-minimummaximum-value-range-manually } 

![](resources/images/data_quality/set_min_max_manually.png)

1.  No aplicativo ** Data Entry **, abra um formulário de entrada de dados.

2.  Clique duas vezes no campo para o qual deseja definir o intervalo de valor mínimo / máximo.

3.  Insira ** Limite mínimo ** e ** Limite máximo ** na caixa de diálogo que aparece.

4.  Clique em **Salvar**.

    If values don't fall within the new value range the next time you
    enter data, the data entry cell will appear with an orange
    background.

5.  (Optional) Type a comment to explain the reason for the discrepancy,
    for example an event at a facility which may have generated a large
    number of clients.

6.  (Opcional) Clique em ** Salvar comentário **.

> ** Dica **
>
> Clique no ícone de estrela para marcar o valor para acompanhamento posterior.

#### Excluir intervalo de valor máximo mínimo { #delete-minimum-maximum-value-range } 

You can permanently delete all minimum maximum value ranges for selected
data sets and organisation units in the **Data Administration** app.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Administração de dados ** e clique em ** Geração de valor mínimo-máximo **.

2.  Selecione o (s) conjunto (s) de dados.

3.  Select an **Organisation unit**. Note, that the selection cascades to 
    descendant organisation units!

4.  Clique em ** Remover **.

### Run a minimum maximum outlier detection { #run-a-minimum-maximum-outlier-detection } 

![](resources/images/data_quality/min_max_analysis.png)

1.  Verifique se você criou intervalos de valor máximo mínimo.

2.  Open the **Data Quality** app and click **Outlier Detection**.

3.  Selecione o (s) conjunto (s) de dados.

4.  Selecione ** Unidade organizacional principal **.

    Multiple organisation units can be selected. The analysis is made on raw data for all organisation units in the sub-hierarchy of the selected units, not on aggregated data.

5.  Selecione ** Desde a data ** e ** Até a data **.

6.  Set **Algorithm** to **Min-max values**.

7.  Select **Max results**

    This refers to the maximum number of outliers listed in the results.

8.  Click **Start**

    The analysis process duration depends on the amount of data that is
    being analysed. If there are standard deviations outliers, they will
    be presented in a list.

    ![](resources/images/data_quality/min_max_result.png)

    For each outlier, you will see the data element, period, organisation unit,
    value, deviation, min, and max.

9.  (Optional) Click **Download as CSV** to download the list in CSV format.

> **Tip**
>
> Click the checkbox to mark the value for further follow-up.

## Análise de acompanhamento { #follow_up_analysis } 

### Sobre a análise de acompanhamento { #about-follow-up-analysis } 

The follow-up analysis creates a list of all data values marked for
follow-up. You can mark a data value for follow-up in the **Data Entry**
app and in the result list you get from a standard deviation outlier or
minimum maximum outlier analysis.

### Crie uma lista de valores de dados marcados para acompanhamento { #create-list-of-data-values-marked-for-follow-up } 

![](resources/images/data_quality/follow_up_analysis.png)

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Data Quality ** e clique em ** Follow-up analysis **.

2.  Selecione um conjunto de dados ou vários conjuntos de dados.

3.  Select **Organisation units**.

    Multiple organisation units can be selected. The analysis is made on raw data “under” the organisation unit, not on aggregated data.

4. Select a **Start Date** and **End Date** which defines the periods which you are interested in looking for values which have been marked for follow up. 

4. Press **Follow up** to generate a list of values which have been marked for follow up. 

5.  (Optional) Click **Download as PDF**, **Download as Excel** or **Download as CSV** to download the validation violations list in PDF, Excel or CSV formats.

![](resources/images/data_quality/follow_up_analysis_result.png)

> **Tip**
>
> Check the **Unfollow** checkbox in the list and click the **Unfollow**-button to remove the follow-up tags from the marked data values.
> You can also enter a comment in the field to indicate any additional 
> information regarding the value. 



# Usando o aplicativo Capture { #capture_app } 

## Sobre o aplicativo Capture { #about_capture_app } 

In the Capture app you register events that occurred at a particular time and place. An event can happen at any given point in time. This stands in contrast to routine data, which is captured for predefined, regular intervals. Events are sometimes called cases or records. In DHIS2, events are linked to a program. The Capture app lets you select the organisation unit and program and specify a date when an event happened, before entering information for the event. Some events are linked to a tracked entity instance, for example a person, allowing longitudinal follow-up.

## Cadastre um evento { #capture_register_event } 

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.

2. Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3. Select an event program.

    You will only see programs associated with the selected organisation unit and programs you have access to, and that are shared with your user group through data level sharing.

4. Se o programa tiver uma combinação de categorias definida, a opção de categoria deverá ser selecionada.

5. Click **Create new event**.

    ![create new event](resources/images/create_new_event.png)

6. Preencha as informações necessárias. Se o estágio do programa de programas estiver configurado para capturar um local:

    - If the field is a coordinate field you can either enter the coordinates
    directly or you can click the **map** icon to the left of the coordinate field.
    The latter one will open a map where you can search for a location or set on
    directly by clicking on the map.

    - If the field is a polygon field you can click the **map** icon to the left of
    the field. This will open a map where you can search for a location and capture
    a polygon (button in the upper right corner of the map).

7. If desired, you can add a note by clicking the **Write note** button at the bottom of the form. Be aware that Event notes are attributed to a user and cannot be deleted. 

8. If desired you can add a relationship by clicking the **Add relationship** button at the bottom of the form.
   See the section about **Adding a relationship** for more information.

9. Clique em ** Salvar e sair ** ou clique na seta ao lado do botão para selecionar ** Salvar e adicionar outro **.

    - **Save and add another** will save the current event and clear the form.
    All the events that you have captured will be displayed in a list at the bottom of the page.
    When you want to finish capturing events you can, if the form is blank,
    click the finish button or if your form contains data click the arrow
    next to **Save and add another** and select **Save and exit**.

> **Note**
>
> Some data elements in an event might be mandatory (marked with a red star next to the data element label).
> All mandatory data elements must be filled in before the user is allowed to complete the event.
> The exception to this is if the user has the authority called __"Ignore validation of required fields in Tracker and Event Capture".__
> If the user has this authority, the mandatory data elements will not be required and
> the red star will not be displayed next to the data element label. Note that super user that have the __"ALL"__ authority automatically
> have this authority.

> **Tip**
>
> The data entry form can also be displayed in **row view**. In this mode the data elements are arranged horizontally. This can be
> achieved by clicking the **Switch to row view** button on the top right of the data entry form. If you are currently in **row view** you
> can switch to the default form view by clicking the **Switch to form view** button on the top right of the data entry form.

## Register a tracked entity instance { #register-a-tracked-entity-instance } 

There are two different ways one can register a tracked entity instance under an organisation unit.
The first way, is to register a tracked entity instance without enrolling it to a tracker program.
The second option, is to register a tracked entity instance with program and enroll it. 

### Without a program enrollment  { #without-a-program-enrollment } 

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.

2. Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3. Click **Create new**.

    ![image](resources/images/register-without-enrollment-new-button.png)

    You'll now be navigated to the registration page. In that page you will see a drop down 
    menu similar to the one in the image below. From the dropdown menu you can select a tracked entity 
    type, eg. Building, Person etc.

    ![image](resources/images/register-without-enrollment-dropdown-menu.png)

4. Select the tracked entity type which you want to create a new instance for.

    ![image](resources/images/register-without-enrollment-dropdown-menu-with-arrow.png)

5. The moment you select a tracked entity type, a form will be shown on the screen. 

    The "Profile" section will be shown. In this section you can add data relevant to the 
    tracked entity instance. The profile section mainly contains all the tracked entity attributes
    linked to the tracked entity type. 

    ![image](resources/images/register-without-enrollment-form.png)

6. Preencha as informações necessárias.

    If the tracked entity type is configured to capture a location:

    - If the field is a coordinate field you can either enter the coordinates
    directly or you can click the **map** icon to the left of the coordinate field.
    The latter one will open a map where you can search for a location or set on
    directly by clicking on the map.

    - If the field is a polygon field you can click the **map** icon to the left of
    the field. This will open a map where you can search for a location and capture
    a polygon (button in the upper right corner of the map).

7. Click the **Save person** button to register the tracked entity instance. 

8. You will now be prompted to the tracked entity instance dashboard. 

    The dashboard will show relevant information about the newly created tracked entity instance.

### With a program enrollment { #with-a-program-enrollment } 

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.

2. Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3. Select a tracker program of your choice.

4. Click **Create new person**. Note that the label of this button corresponds to the tracked entity type of the program, which could vary, such as "Building," "Person," etc.

    ![create new event](resources/images/register-and-enroll-program-selection.png)

5. Now, you will be able to see a form similar to the image below. 

    The enrollment form has different layouts depending on how the program is customized. The top section has the title "Enrollment",
    and it holds all the relevant information about the enrollment details. This section will always be present, regardless of layout.
    Underneath, the different data input fields relevant to the tracked entity instance will be displayed. 
    These fields will either be displayed within sections or as a completely custom form. 
    The sections, or custom form, mainly contains all the tracked entity attributes linked to the program or tracked entity type.

      ![create new event](resources/images/register-and-enroll-form.png)

6. Fill in the required information for the enrollment.
    If the tracked entity type is configured to capture a location:

    - If the field is a coordinate field you can either enter the coordinates
    directly or you can click the **map** icon to the left of the coordinate field.
    The latter one will open a map where you can search for a location or set on
    directly by clicking on the map.

    - If the field is a polygon field you can click the **map** icon to the left of
    the field. This will open a map where you can search for a location and capture
    a polygon (button in the upper right corner of the map).

7. Click **Save person** to register the tracked entity instance. 
    The **Save** button shows a loading spinner and the **Cancel** button is disabled while the request is processing.

8. You will now be prompted to the tracked entity instance dashboard. 

    The dashboard will show relevant information about the newly created tracked entity instance.

> **Note**
>
> Some data elements in an event might be mandatory (marked with a red star next to the data element label).
> All mandatory data elements must be filled in before the user is allowed to complete the event.
> The exception to this is if the user has the authority called __"Ignore validation of required fields in Tracker and Event Capture".__
> If the user has this authority, the mandatory data elements will not be required and
> the red star will not be displayed next to the data element label. Note that super user that have the __"ALL"__ authority automatically
> have this authority.

> **Tip**
>
> The data entry form can also be displayed in **row view**. In this mode the data elements are arranged horizontally. This can be
> achieved by clicking the **Switch to row view** button on the top right of the data entry form. If you are currently in **row view** you
> can switch to the default form view by clicking the **Switch to form view** button on the top right of the data entry form.

### Enrollment with auto generated events  { #enrollment-with-auto-generated-events } 

Events can automatically be created when enrolling in a program.

To automatically generate events, you can do the necessary configuration in the maintenance app.
1. Open the maintenance app

2. Select the Program tab
![](resources/images/auto-generated-01.png)

3. Select a Tracker program
![](resources/images/auto-generated-02.png)

4. Select the Program stages tab
![](resources/images/auto-generated-03.png)

5. Click on the program stage you would like to generate an event for
![](resources/images/auto-generated-04.png)

6. Select "Auto-generate event"
![](resources/images/auto-generated-05.png)

You can set multiple program stages within a program to be auto-generating (this will create an event for each program stage configured this way)

### Enrollment with open data entry form { #enrollment-with-open-data-entry-form } 

A program can be configured to automatically take the user to register a new event immediately after enrolling a tracked entity instance. To enable this behavior, the program must have at least one program stage with the "Open data entry form after registration" option checked. If more than one program stage has this option enabled, the first stage will be used.

To configure it, you must follow the steps described in the [Enrollment with auto generated events](#enrollment-with-auto-generated-events) section and then check the option "Open data entry form after enrollment".

### Enrollment with first stage on registration page { #enrollment-with-first-stage-on-registration-page } 

For tracker programs enable the "First stage appears on registration page" flag in the Maintenance. The enrollment registration page will now display the first program stage the user has access to.

![](resources/images/first-stage-during-registration.png)

#### Active type of event { #active-type-of-event } 

If the stage has the "Open data entry form after enrollment" selected, then the event will be generated into the ACTIVE status. Also its execution date will be calculated for the event, in addition to a due date.
The generation happens based on either the enrollment date or the incident date. You can choose the reporting date from the dropdown menu "Report date to use".
![](resources/images/auto-generated-06.png)

As shown in the image you have three options, a) Incident date b) Enrollment date or c) No value. 
Choosing reporting date as "Incident date" indicates that both the event execution date and due date will be the same as the incident date.
Choosing reporting date as either "Enrollment date" or "No value" indicates that both the event execution date and due date will be the same as the enrollment date.

#### Schedule type of event { #schedule-type-of-event } 

When the "Open data entry after enrollment" is not checked, it means that the event generated will be a SCHEDULE event. 
The scheduled event does not have an execution date, but only a due date. The due date for these future events are calculated based on either enrollment date or incident date. If the flag below is checked, the reference date is the enrollment date, if the flag is not checked, the incident date is used.
![](resources/images/auto-generated-07.png)

When there is no incident date, the reference date will fall back on the enrollment date regardless of whether the flag above is checked.

On SCHEDULE type of events the user can also configure the "Scheduled days from start". Which means if a stage has a number in "Scheduled days from start" the reference date will increased by that number. 
In the example below we increase the due date by 30 days.

![](resources/images/auto-generated-08.png)

When the "Scheduled days from start" does not contain a number or contains 0 the reference date is used without adding any days to it.


### Possible duplicates detection { #possible-duplicates-detection } 

In both cases of registering a tracked entity instance, (with enrollment or without enrollment) the system will start looking for possible duplicates.
Note that programs need to be correctly configured through the maintenance app for the system to start detecting duplicates when enrolling a new person in a program. 

To configure a program through the maintenance app you will have to: 


1. Open the maintenance app.
![](resources/images/duplicates-maintenance-config-00.png)

2. In the program section select your program. We select Child Programme for this example.
![](resources/images/duplicates-maintenance-config-01.png)

3. Select the Attributes tab.
![](resources/images/duplicates-maintenance-config-02.png)

4. Enable duplicates search by checking program attributes as searchable
![](resources/images/duplicates-maintenance-config-03.png)


The attributes you have selected as "Searchable" will be the ones which the system will use to detect possible duplicates against.  
Let us explain this with an example that demonstrates the detection of possible duplicates while enrolling a child in the Child Programme. 

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.
![](resources/images/duplicates-on-creation-00.png)

2. Select your organisation unit and program from the menu on the top.
![](resources/images/duplicates-on-creation-01.png)

3. Click **Create new person**
![](resources/images/duplicates-on-creation-02.png)

4. Fill in the first name in the form. **Remember, the first name we have checked as "Searchable" in the maintenance app.** 
Click **Save person**. The system will start looking for possible duplicates that match the name Sarah.
![](resources/images/duplicates-on-creation-03.png)

5. The system will automatically show a list of possible duplicates if there are any. 
![](resources/images/duplicates-on-creation-04.png)

6. You can choose to make a new enrollement by clicking **Save as new** or if you see the right person in the list - you can view the dashboard.
![](resources/images/duplicates-on-creation-05.png)

> **Tip**
>
> You can configure duplicates detection for tracked entity types the same way as we did for programs. 


### Program rules execution { #program-rules-execution } 

In both cases of registering a tracked entity instance (with enrollment or without enrollment), the system will run program rules you have configured.
Note that rules can be configured in the maintenance app.

To see a rule being executed while enrolling a tracked entity instance you will have to take the following steps. 

1. Configure a rule in the maintenance app. For the example below we configured a rule that throws a warning when the date of birth is less than a year.

2. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.
![](resources/images/duplicates-on-creation-00.png)

3. Select your organisation unit and program from the menu on the top.
![](resources/images/program-rules-on-creation-00.png)

4. Fill in the date of birth with a value which is less than a year. In our case this is 27th of January 2021. 
![](resources/images/program-rules-on-creation-01.png)

5. You will now be able to see the warning produced by the program rule underneath the birth date field. 
![](resources/images/program-rules-on-creation-02.png)

## Re-enroll an existing tracked entity instance { #re-enroll-an-existing-tracked-entity-instance } 

When you are on the re-enroll page, the teId will be visible in the URL parameters. The attributes of the tracked entity instance will be pre-fielded with the current values. 
![](resources/images/enroll-existing-tei.png)


## Adicionando um relacionamento { #capture_add_relationship } 

Relationships can be added either during registration, editing or viewing of an event.
Currently the **Capture App** only supports *Event to Tracked Entity Instance* relationships.

1. Durante um evento, clique em ** Adicionar relacionamento **.

2. Selecione o tipo de relacionamento que deseja criar.

You now have two options: 

- **Link to an existing Tracked Entity Instance** or 

- **Create new Tracked Entity Instance**.

![relationship options](resources/images/relationship_options.png)

### Link para uma instância de entidade rastreada existente { #link-to-an-existing-tracked-entity-instance } 

1. Clique em ** Link para uma Instância de Entidade Rastreada existente **.

- You will be presented with some options for searching for a **Tracked Entity Instance**.
  You have the option to select a **program**. If a **program** is selected the attributes are derived from the selected **program**.
  If no **program** is selected, only the attributes that belong to the **Tracked Entity Instance** will be visible.

    ![search for Tracked Entity Instance](resources/images/search_tei.png)

    - If the **Tracked Entity Instance** or **program** is configured with a unique attribute, this attribute can be
      used for finding a specific **Tracked Entity Instance** or **program**. This attribute should be presented alone.
      When the unique attribute field has been filled out, click the **Search** button located right below
      the unique attribute field.

    - If the **Tracked Entity Instance** or **program** has attibutes these can be used for searching by expanding the **Search by attributes** box.
      When all desired attribute fields have been filled out, click the **Search by attributes** button located at the bottom. You can also limit the search by setting the **Organisation unit scope**. If set to *All accessible* you will search for the **Tracked Entity Instance** in all organisation units you have access to. If you select *Selected*, you will be asked to select which organisation units to search within.

2. After a successful search you will be presented with a list of **Tracked Entity Instances** matching the search criteria.
   To create a relationship click the **Link** button on the **Tracked Entity Instance** you would like to create a relationship to.

- If you did not find the **Tracked Entity Instance** you were looking for, you can either click the **New search** or **Edit search** buttons.
  **New search** will take you to new blank search while **Edit search** will take you back to the search you just performed keeping the search criteria.

### Criar uma nova instância de entidade rastreada { #create-new-tracked-entity-instance } 

1. Clique em ** Criar nova instância de entidade rastreada **.

- You are now presented with a form for registering a new **Tracked Entity Instance**. You can choose to either register with or without a program.
  If a program is selected, the new **Tracked Entity Instance** will be enrolled in said program. You can also change the **Organisation unit** by removing the one that is automatically set and selecting a new one.

  ![register new Tracked Entity Instance](resources/images/register_tei.png)

2. Preencha os atributos desejados (e possivelmente obrigatórios) e os detalhes de inscrição.

3. Clique em ** Criar instância de entidade rastreada e link **.

> **Note**
>
> When filling in data you might face a warning telling you that a possible duplicate has been found. You can click the warning to see these
> duplicates and if the duplicate is a match you can choose to link that **Tracked Entity Instance** by clicking the **Link** button.
> If the warning is still present when you are done filling in data, you will not see the **Create Tracked Entity Instance and Link** button.
> Instead you will be presented with a button called **Review duplicates**. When you click this button a list of possible duplicates will be displayed.
> If any of these duplicates matches the **Tracked Entity Instance** you are trying to create you can click the **Link** button, if not you can click
> the **Save as new person** button to register a new **Tracked Entity Instance**.


## Editar um evento { #capture_edit_event } 

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.

2. Selecione um programa.

3. Select an organisation unit or click the _all events_-link to view all events accessible to you.

    ![](resources/images/main-page-all-accessible-records.png)
   Todos os eventos registrados no programa selecionado aparecem em uma lista.

4. Clique no evento que você deseja modificar.

5. Clique no botão ** Editar evento **.

6. Modifique os detalhes do evento e clique em ** Salvar **.

## Excluir um evento { #capture_delete_event } 

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.

2. Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3. Selecione um programa.

   Todos os eventos registrados no programa selecionado aparecem em uma lista.

4. Clique no ícone ** ponto triplo ** no evento que deseja excluir.

5. No menu exibido, clique em ** Excluir evento **.

    ![delete event](resources/images/delete_event.png)

## Modificar um layout de lista de eventos { #capture_modify_event_list_layout } 

You can select which columns to show or hide in an event list. This can
be useful for example when you have a long list of data elements
assigned to a program stage.

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.

2. Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3. Selecione um programa.

   Todos os eventos registrados no programa selecionado aparecem em uma lista.

4. Clique no ícone de ** engrenagem ** no canto superior direito da lista de eventos.

5. Selecione as colunas que você deseja exibir e clique em ** Salvar **.

    ![modify event list](resources/images/modify_event_list.png)

> **Tip**
>
> You can reorganize the order of the data elements by draging and dropping them in the list.

## Filtrar uma lista de eventos { #capture_filter_event_list } 

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.

2. Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3. Selecione um programa.

   Todos os eventos registrados no programa selecionado aparecem em uma lista.

    Along the top of the event list are buttons with the same names as the column headers in the list.

4. Use os botões na parte superior da lista para filtrar com base em uma data de relatório ou um elemento de dados específico.

    ![filter event](resources/images/filter_event.png)

> **Note**
>
> Different data element types are fitered in different ways. A **Number** data element will for instance show a rang to filter on while a **Text** data element will ask you to enter a search query to filter on.

## Classifique uma lista de eventos { #capture_sort_event_list } 

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.

2. Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3. Selecione um programa.
   Todos os eventos registrados no programa selecionado aparecem em uma lista.

4. Clique em um dos cabeçalhos de coluna para classificar a lista nesse elemento de dados em ordem crescente.

   Uma pequena seta para cima é exibida ao lado da coluna para mostrar que a lista está classificada em ordem crescente.

5. Clique no cabeçalho da coluna novamente para classificar a lista nesse elemento de dados em ordem decrescente.

   Uma pequena seta para baixo é exibida ao lado da coluna para mostrar que a lista está classificada em ordem decrescente.

    ![sort event](resources/images/sort_event.png)

## Baixe uma lista de eventos { #capture_download_event_list } 

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.

2. Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3. Selecione um programa.
   Todos os eventos registrados no programa selecionado aparecem em uma lista.

4. Click the **three dots** icon on the top right of the event list.

5. Click **Download data**.

6. Selecione o formato que deseja baixar.

    ![download event list](resources/images/download_event_list.png)

> **Note**
>
> You can download an event list in JSON or CSV formats.

## Visualizações de lista predefinidas { #capture_views } 

Você pode configurar suas próprias visualizações e salvá-las para uso posterior. As visualizações também podem ser compartilhadas com outras pessoas. Uma visualização consiste em filtros, ordem de coluna e ordem de classificação de evento.

### Salvando uma nova visualização { #capture_view_save } 

1. Selecione uma unidade organizacional e um programa.

2. Defina os filtros usando os botões de filtro acima da lista de eventos (descritos em detalhes [aqui] (# capture_filter_event_list)).

    ![](resources/images/view_save_filters.png)

3. Set the column order by clicking the cog icon and then, in the pop-up, specify the layout according to your preference (how to modify the layout is described in detail [here](#capture_modify_event_list_layout)).

    ![](resources/images/view_save_column_order.png)

4. Classifique os eventos clicando em um dos cabeçalhos das colunas (descrito em detalhes [aqui] (# capture_sort_event_list)).

    ![](resources/images/view_save_sort_order.png)

5. Abra o menu mais (ícone de três pontos) à direita e selecione "Salvar visualização atual ..."

    ![](resources/images/view_save_menu.png)

6. Preencha um nome para a visualização e clique em salvar.

    ![](resources/images/view_save_name.png)

### Carregando uma visualização { #capture_view_load } 

1. Selecione uma unidade organizacional e um programa com uma visão predefinida.

2. As visualizações devem estar disponíveis acima da própria lista de eventos. Clique em uma visualização para carregá-la.

    ![](resources/images/view_load_unselected.png)

3. Um exemplo de visualização carregada.

    ![](resources/images/view_load_selected.png)

### Atualizando uma vista { #capture_view_update } 

1. Carregue a visão que você gostaria de atualizar (veja [carregando uma visão] (# capture_view_load)).

2. Faça suas alterações nos filtros, ordem das colunas e / ou ordem de classificação do evento.

    > **Note**
    >
    > An asterisk(*) is appended to the view name when the view has unsaved changes.

3. Abra o menu mais (ícone de três pontos) à direita e selecione "Atualizar visualização".

    ![](resources/images/view_update.png)

### Compartilhando uma visão { #capture_view_share } 

1. Carregue a visão que você gostaria de compartilhar (veja [carregando uma visão] (# capture_view_load)).

2. Abra o menu mais (ícone de três pontos) à direita e selecione "Compartilhar visualização ..."

    ![](resources/images/view_share.png)

3. Faça suas alterações. Você normalmente adicionaria usuários / grupos (1) e / ou alteraria os direitos de acesso de usuários / grupos adicionados anteriormente (2).

    ![](resources/images/view_share_access.png)

### Excluindo uma vista { #capture_view_delete } 

1. Carregue a visualização que você gostaria de excluir (consulte [carregando uma visualização] (# capture_view_load)).

2. Abra o menu mais (ícone de três pontos) à direita e selecione "Excluir visualização".

    ![](resources/images/view_delete.png)

## User assignment in events programs { #capture_user_assignment } 

Os eventos podem ser atribuídos aos usuários. Este recurso deve ser ativado por programa.

### Assigning user to new events { #capture_user_assignment_new } 

1. Selecione uma unidade de organização e um programa com atribuição de usuário habilitada.

2. Clique em ** Novo Evento ** no canto superior direito.

3. Você encontrará a seção responsável perto da parte inferior da página de entrada de dados. Pesquise e selecione o usuário ao qual deseja atribuir o evento. O responsável será preservado quando você salvar o evento.

    ![](resources/images/user_assignment_new.png)

    ![](resources/images/user_assignment_new_filled.png)

### Alterar cessionário { #capture_user_assignment_edit } 

1. Selecione uma unidade de organização e um programa com atribuição de usuário habilitada.

2. Clique em um evento da lista

3. Na coluna certa, você encontrará a seção do responsável.

    ![](resources/images/user_assignment_edit.png)

4. Click the **Edit** button, or the **Assign** button if the event is not currently assigned to anyone.

    ![](resources/images/user_assignment_edit_button.png)

    ![](resources/images/user_assignment_edit_add.png)

5. Search for and select the user you would like to reassign the event to. Click the **Save** button.

### Assignee in the event list { #assignee-in-the-event-list } 

Na lista de eventos, você poderá ver o responsável por evento. Além disso, você pode classificar e filtrar a lista pelo responsável.

#### Filtrar por cessionário { #filter-by-assignee } 

1. Clique no filtro ** Atribuído a **.

    ![](resources/images/user_assignment_event_list.png)

2. Selecione o filtro de cessionário de sua preferência e clique em atualizar.

    ![](resources/images/user_assignment_event_list_options.png)

## Programas rastreadores { #capture_tracker_programs } 

The Capture app supports the workinglists in tracker programs, but when you open a tracked entity instance, you will be redirected to the enrollment dashboard in the Tracker Capture app.

![](resources/images/tracker_program.png)


## Search for tracked entity instances { #search-for-tracked-entity-instances } 

### In Program scope { #in-program-scope } 

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.

2. Selecione um programa.

    You will only see programs associated with the selected organisation unit and programs you have access to, and that are shared with your user group through data level sharing.

3. Click the Search button.

4. From the dropdown menu click the first option.

    ![](resources/images/search-by-attributes-find-button.png)

    These steps will take you to the search page. There, based on the configuration of your organisation, will see the different attributes you can search with. An example of how this looks is the following.

    ![](resources/images/search-by-attributes-on-scope-program-overview-0.png)

    To execute a search now:

1. Fill in the attributes you want to search with.

2. Click the **Search by attributes** button.

    ![](resources/images/search-by-attributes-on-scope-program-overview-1.png)

3. The results of the search will be displayed as follows.

    ![](resources/images/search-by-attributes-on-scope-program-overview-2.png)

    In this list you can see the entries that match your search. For each entry you can have a total of three options.

    a. You can choose to view the dashboard for the **Tracked Entity Instance** by clicking the "View dashboard" button

    ![](resources/images/search-by-attributes-on-scope-program-overview-5.png)

    b. You can view the the active enrollment of a **Tracked Entity Instance** by clicking the "View active enrollment" button

    ![](resources/images/search-by-attributes-on-scope-program-overview-3.png)

    c. You can re-enroll a **Tracked Entity Instance** to the current program you are searching within.

    ![](resources/images/search-by-attributes-on-scope-program-overview-4.png)


#### Fallback search { #fallback-search } 

Execute a full search as described above. If the search you have made has results they will be displayed. However, the actual **Tracked Entity Instance** you are searching for may be within a different program. In that case, you may want to extend the search to other programs. This is known as a fallback search.

To execute a fallback search, simply press the button on the bottom saying "Search in all programs".
You will see the **Results in all programs** be appended below the search in the current program. These two modules are collapsible to save space. 

If the fallback can not be done, you will be presented with a modal to go **Back to search** so that you can change the search terms.

> **Note**
>
> The fallback search is only possible when searching within a Program.

![](resources/images/search-by-attributes-fallback-overview-0.png)

#### Create new **Tracked entity instance** { #create-new-tracked-entity-instance } 

When none of the results match, you can create a new user by clicking **Create new** button on the bottom of the search page. 

Based on the search domain, you will be navigated to the registration of the selected **Tracked entity type**, with or without program enrollment preselected. 
The search terms that you typed in before will be prefilled in the registration form.

![](resources/images/search-page-create-new-tei.png)


### In Tracked entity type scope { #in-tracked-entity-type-scope } 

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.

2. Click the **Search** button to open the search page.

3. Click on the drop down menu and select the type of entity you want to search for.

    ![](resources/images/search-by-attributes-domain-selector-overview-0.png)

4. Make a selection from the list.

    ![](resources/images/search-by-attributes-domain-selector-overview-1.png)

    Based on the configuration of your organisation you will see the different attributes you can search with. An example of how this looks is the following.

    ![](resources/images/search-by-attributes-on-scope-tetype-overview-0.png)

    To execute a search now:

1. Fill in the attributes you want to search with.

2. Click the Search by attributes button.

    ![](resources/images/search-by-attributes-on-scope-tetype-overview-1.png)

3. The results of the search will be displayed as follows.

    ![](resources/images/search-by-attributes-on-scope-tetype-overview-2.png)

    In this list you can see the entries that match your search. For each entry you have the option to click the "View Dashboard" button to view the dashboard for the **Tracked Entity Instance**.


### Too many results functionality { #too-many-results-functionality } 

The program or tracked entitiy type you are searching within may be configured with a limit on the number of results that are retrurned from a search. If your search results exceed this limit you will be shown a warning message like the one below.

![](resources/images/search-by-attributes-on-scope-program-overview-too-many-results-message.png)

### Pagination { #pagination } 

The results page shows up to five results at a time. You should try to use specific search criteria so that there are not too many matches. However, if there are more than five results, you can see the next results by using the **>** button at the end of the page.

![](resources/images/search-by-attributes-on-scope-program-overview-pagination.png)

## List tracked entity instances enrolled in program { #list-tracked-entity-instances-enrolled-in-program } 

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.

2. Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3. Select a tracker program with "Display front page list" set to true.

4. The program can have categories associated with it (implementing partner would be an example of such a category). If this is the case, fill them in.

### Custom TEI working list for programs with "Display front page list" set to false. { #custom-tei-working-list-for-programs-with-display-front-page-list-set-to-false } 

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.

2. Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3. Select a tracker program with "Display front page list" set to false.

4. If the program has any custom working list you are able to click and load it.

![](resources/images/tei_list.png)

### Filter the list { #filter-the-list } 

Use the buttons above the list itself to filter it.

![](resources/images/tei_list_filters.png)

As an example, you could filter the list to show only tracked entity instances where you have been assigned an event: Click the "Assigned to" filter (1), select "Me" (2) and then "Apply" the changes (3).

![](resources/images/tei_list_filter_example.png)

### Sort the list { #sort-the-list } 

Click one of the column headers to sort the list by that column. A small arrow is displayed next to the column header to indicate the current sort order. Click again to change between ascending and descending order.

![](resources/images/tei_list_sort_order.png)

### Modify the list layout { #modify-the-list-layout } 

You can select which columns to show in the list and also reorganize the order of the columns.

Click the **gear** icon in the top right corner of the list. Tick the checkboxes for the the columns you would like to display (1) and reorgainze the columns by dragging and dropping (2).

![](resources/images/tei_list_column_layout.png)

### Loading a predefined list view { #loading-a-predefined-list-view } 

You will find the predefined list views above the filters for the list. Click to load a view. 

![](resources/images/tei_list_predefined_views.png)

### Download the tracked entities list { #download-the-tracked-entities-list } 

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.
2. Selecione uma unidade organizacional.
3. Select a tracker program with "Display front page list" set to true.
4. Click the **three dots** icon on the top right of the tracked entities list.
5. Click **Download data**.
6. Selecione o formato que deseja baixar.
    ![download tracked entities list](resources/images/download_tracked_entities_list.png)
> **Note**
> You can download the tracked entities list in JSON or CSV formats.

## Tracker program stage working list { #tracker-program-stage-working-list } 

You can show data elements from a single stage in a working list. Select the "Program stage" option from the "More filters" dropdown, then choose a program stage.

![](resources/images/program_stage_button.png)

![](resources/images/program_stage_working_list.png)

The tracker program stage list can be [filtered](#filter-the-list), [sorted](#sort-the-list), [modified](#modify-the-list-layout), [saved](#capture_view_save), [updated](#capture_view_update), [deleted](#capture_view_delete) and [shared](#capture_view_share) in the same way as other working lists. Additionally, the program stage list can be [filtered by assignee](#assignee-in-the-event-list), just like an event program list.

## Implementer / administrator info { #implementer_info } 

### Metadata caching { #metadata_caching } 

For performance reasons the Capture app caches metadata in the client browser. When metadata is updated on the server the changes needs to be propagated to the clients that have already cached the metadata. Depending on the change, this is done in one of three ways:

1. If the change is bound to a program you will need to increase the program version for that particular program. For example, if you change the data elements in a program or a program rule, the version for the bound program needs be increased.

2. If the change is NOT bound to a program you will need to increase ANY program version for the change to be propagated to the clients. Examples here are changes to constants, organisation unit levels or organisation unit groups.

3. The exception to the two rules above is option sets. Option sets have their own version property, i.e. increasing the option set version should ensure the option set metadata are propagated to the clients.


## Enrollment dashboard { #enrollment-dashboard } 

### Enabling the enrollment dashboard { #enabling-the-enrollment-dashboard } 

#### Opt in { #opt-in } 

Enable the enrollment dashboard for a Tracker program for all the users. The dialog is visible for users with program write access. 

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-opt-in.png)

#### Opt out { #opt-out } 

Disable the enrollment dashboard for a Tracker program for all the users.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-opt-out.png)

### Reaching the enrollment dashboard via url { #reaching-the-enrollment-dashboard-via-url } 

You reach the enrollment dashboard either by typing in the address bar of your browser or using the user interface of the capture app.
In this section we are focusing on the first use-case, where you type or paste the url you want to access in the Address bar.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-01.png)

One way to reach the enrollment dashboard and view a specific tracked entity instance's enrollment is by using _only_ the enrollment id. For example the link .../dhis-web-capture/#/enrollment?enrollmentId=wBU0RAsYjKE will 
take you the dashboard for the enrollment with id `wBU0RAsYjKE`. 

The top of the dashboard defines your context. For example in the image below the context is as follows, the selected program is "Child Programme", the organisation unit is "Ngelehun CHC", the selected person is "Anna Jones" and the selected enrollment is "2017-11-16 11:38".

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-02.png)

You can change your context by clicking the "x" button.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-03.png)

#### Deselecting the program { #deselecting-the-program } 

When you deselect the program you see the following

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-05.png)

##### Selecting a program with enrollments { #selecting-a-program-with-enrollments } 

When program _and_ enrollment selections are empty, you first have to select a program. 
If the tracked entity instance (in this case "Anna Jones") has enrollments under the program you select you will see the following message.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-09.png)

##### Selecting a program with zero enrollments { #selecting-a-program-with-zero-enrollments } 

If the tracked entity instance (in this case "Anna Jenkins") does not have enrollments under the program you select you will see a message explaining that there are no enrollments for that program.
You will also be given the option to enroll "Anna Jenkins" in that program.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-10.png)

##### Selecting an event program  { #selecting-an-event-program } 

When you select an event program you will see the following. (Remember event programs do not have enrollments in the system, only tracker programs do).

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-11.png)

You will also be given the option to either create a new event for the selected program or view the working lists for the selected program.

##### Selecting a program with a different tracked entity type  { #selecting-a-program-with-a-different-tracked-entity-type } 

When your selected tracked entity type is a person, as in our example with Anna Jenkins, and you select a program that is not of type person but for example of a type Malaria case you will see the following.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-12.png)

You are also given the option to enroll a tracked entity instance in the program you selected.

#### Deselecting the organisation unit { #deselecting-the-organisation-unit } 

When you deselect the organisation unit you see the following

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-06.png)

#### Deselecting the tracked entity instance { #deselecting-the-tracked-entity-instance } 

When you deselect the tracked entity instance, in this case "Anna Jones" you are taken to the working lists in that Tracker program.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-07.png)

#### Deselecting the enrollment { #deselecting-the-enrollment } 

When you deselect the enrollment you see the following

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-08.png)


###Quick actions { #quick-actions } 

The quick actions widget offers shortcuts for frequently used actions for the current enrollment.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dashboard-quick-actions.png)

### Program stage list { #program-stage-list } 

Stages can be collapsed or expanded to reveal the events inside.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-stages-events-02.png)

#### Collapsed stages { #collapsed-stages } 

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-stages-events-01.png)

In the collapsed state, you can view the summary information about this stage including: 
- Ícone
- Program stage name
- Program stage description (on hovering the information icon)
- Total number of events
- Last updated date 
Depending on the status of events, there can be additional information regarding: total number of overdue events or total number of scheduled events.

#### Expanded stages { #expanded-stages } 

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-stages-events-03.png)

When you expand the list, you will see the table contains the data of events in the stage. This includes mandatory columns: `Status`, `Report date` and `Organization unit`, the following columns depend on the data elements that have been selected as `Display in list`  of event.

Events are sorted with most recent on top and other columns are also sortable.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-stages-events-04.png)

When clicking  **New {stage event name}** button, you will be redirected to the  **Add new event page** for this selected stage.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-stages-events-06.png)


When clicking  **Go to full {stage event name}** button, you will be redirected to the  **Program stage list page** for this selected stage.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-stages-events-08.png)

#### Expanded stages with more than 5 events  { #expanded-stages-with-more-than-5-events } 

In case there are more than 5 events in the list, only the first 5 are shown. You will be able to view the rest by clicking  **Show more**.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-stages-events-05.png)

If you want to collapse events, you can use  **Reset list** button which will return the table back to the default sorting and initial 5 events.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-stages-events-07.png)

### Enrollment widget { #enrollment-widget } 

On the enrollment page you can see the enrollment widget

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-enrollment-widget-1.png)

#### Enrollment actions { #enrollment-actions } 

When you click on the enrollment actions button, a menu with all the available actions will open. You can:

- Change the enrollment status to Active, Canceled or Completed using the buttons in the menu.
- Mark or remove the enrollment for a follow-up.
- Transfer the enrollment to another organisation unit
- Delete the enrollment
- Add coordinates to the enrollment

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-enrollment-widget-2.png)

There can only be one active enrollment at a time. If there are no active enrollments, there will be a button **Add new** to enroll the tracked entity instance in the program again.
If the program only allows one enrollment per tracked entity instance, the **Add new** button will be disabled with a tooltip saying `Only one enrollment per {TET} is allowed in this program`.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-enrollment-widget-add-new.png)

#### Transfer the enrollment to another organisation unit { #transfer-the-enrollment-to-another-organisation-unit } 

In the enrollment actions, you could also choose to transfer the enrollment to another organisation unit. Click the transfer button and select the organisation unit you want to transfer the enrollment to.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-enrollment-widget-transfer.png)

#### Delete the enrollment { #delete-the-enrollment } 

You can delete the enrollment by clicking the delete button and confirming the action in the modal. 

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-enrollment-widget-3.png)

#### Complete the enrollment { #complete-the-enrollment } 

You can complete the enrollment by clicking the complete button. When there are active events, you can choose to complete the enrollment along with the events from the confirmation modal.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-enrollment-widget-4.png)

### Enrollment note widget { #enrollment-note-widget } 

The enrollment note widget displays notes and allows addition of notes, associated with the current enrollment. 

![](resources/images/enrollment-widget-note.png)

By clicking in the text field, you will be able to enter new text and see action buttons **Save note** and **Cancel**. Be aware that Enrollment notes are attributed to a user and cannot be deleted. 


### Relationship widget { #relationship-widget } 

The Relationships widget on the enrollment dashboard is used for viewing the record’s linked relationships to other records.
The number next to the title signifies the total number of relationships

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-relationship-widget.png)

For tracked entity instance relationships, the key attributes shown in the widget are the attributes that have been selected to be displayed on the relationship type page in Maintenance.

If no attributes are selected, it will just show a row per record with tracked entity type name and relationship creation date.

When clicking a tracked entity instance you should be taken to the Enrollment Dashboard. If the relationship type includes a program, you should be taken to the latest enrollment for that program. If no program is specified, you should still be sent to the enrollment dashboard, but without a program.

Click the **Add new** button to add a new relationship. Adding a new relationship opens a dialog where you can select the applicable relationship type.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-relationship-widget-add.png)

Choose between linking to an existing tracked entity instance or creating a new one.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-relationship-widget-add-choose.png)

#### Existing tracked entity instance { #existing-tracked-entity-instance } 

Use the search form to find any existing record to link to.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-relationship-widget-add-existing.png)

#### New tracked entity instance { #new-tracked-entity-instance } 

Use the form to create a new record and link.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-relationship-widget-add-new.png)

### Tracked entity instance profile widget { #tracked-entity-instance-profile-widget } 

On the enrollment dashboard, you can view the tracked entity instance profile widget. Inside the profile widget you can view the key attributes values. 

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-tei-profile-widget.png)

Click the **Edit** button to make changes to the tracked entity instance profile. Editing the profile opens a dialog where the profile attributes can be changed.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-tei-profile-widget-edit.png)

Click the **Delete ${tracked entity type}** button to delete the tracked entity. You can confirm the action from the dialog. Once confirmed, tracked entity and all its associated enrollment and events across all programs will be deleted. To delete a tracked entity that has any enrollments, the user needs the authority **Delete tracked entity instance and associated enrollments and events**.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-tei-profile-widget-delete.png)

### Feedback widget { #feedback-widget } 

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-feedback-widget-1.png)

On the enrollment dashboard, the feedback widget displays text and values that are triggered by certain conditions. 
If the current dashboard triggers some rules set up in the program, the text or values will be automatically displayed.

#### Empty state { #empty-state } 

If there isn't any feedback for the current dashboard, the widget shows a short _empty_ message.
If there aren't any program rules that could show feedback for the current dashboard then the widget is hidden.


### Indicator widget { #indicator-widget } 

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-indicator-widget-1.png)

On the enrollment dashboard, the indicator widget displays indicator text and values output related to the current dashboard.
The indicators will be sorted alphabetically.

#### Empty state { #empty-state } 

If there aren't any related indicators or indicator output for the current dashboard, the widget shows a short _empty_ message.
If the current dashboard can't show any indicator output (because it has no related indicators) then the widget is hidden.

#### Legends { #legends } 

Some indicator values show a colored circle next to the value. 
The colored circle shows the related legend color for that indicator value. 
Colored legend circles are only shown for indicator values that have them set up.


### Warning widget { #warning-widget } 

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-warning-widget-1.png)

On the enrollment dashboard, the warning widget displays warnings related to the current dashboard. The widget shows warnings that are not associated with any specific data item.
If there aren't any warnings to show for the current dashboard then the widget is hidden.

### Error Widget { #error-widget } 

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-error-widget-1.png)

On the enrollment dashboard, the errors widget displays errors related to the current dashboard. The widget shows errors that are not associated with any specific data item.
If there aren't any errors to show for the current dashboard then the widget is hidden.

## Enrollment event view and edit page { #enrollment-event-view-and-edit-page } 

### Navigation  { #navigation } 

You can reach the enrollment event edit page is by clicking any event in the Program stage list from the Enrollment Overview page.

### Top bar context  { #top-bar-context } 

At the top of the page you can see various information related to the current context. You can see the program, the organization unit, the tracked entity, the enrollment date, the stage and the enrollment event date.

To go to Enrollment Overview page you can:
- click the "Back to all stages and events" button.
- deselect the stage from the top bar.
- deselect the event from the top bar.

![](resources/images/enrollment-event-view-edit-navigation.png)

### View/Edit event form  { #viewedit-event-form } 

This is the form where you can see and edit the enrollment event details.

#### Form header  { #form-header } 

In the view/edit event form you can see the stage name and icon.

![](resources/images/enrollment-event-view-edit-header.png)

### Top bar context   { #top-bar-context } 

At the top of the page you can see different informations related with the current context. You can see the program, the organization unit, the tracked entity, the enrollment date, the stage. 

To go to Enrollment Overview page you can: 
- deselect the stage from the top bar. 
- deselect the event from the top bar. 

![](resources/images/enrollment-event-new-navigation.png) 


### Scheduled date in edit event form { #scheduled-date-in-edit-event-form } 
If an event has the status Scheduled or Overdue, you will be able to see the **Report** and **Schedule** tab. 

![](resources/images/enrollment-edit-event-schedule-date-1.png)


In the **Report** tab, the scheduled date field will still be shown, but will be greyed out, and there will be an icon next to it with a tooltip saying “Go to **Schedule** tab to reschedule this event”.

In the **Schedule** tab, the similar information about scheduling an event as in New event workspace will be shown. You will be able to edit the schedule date and save the change by clicking **Schedule** button.

![](resources/images/enrollment-edit-event-schedule-date.png)

If an active event has a scheduled date before becoming active or a completed event has scheduled date, this date should still be shown in the workspace. 
It’ll be locked with an icon next to it and a tooltip saying “Scheduled date cannot be changed for active/completed events”. 

#### Scheduled date with Hide due date enabled { #scheduled-date-with-hide-due-date-enabled } 
If the flag “Hide due date” in the Maintenance configuration is enabled, scheduled date will not be shown in the form. 

However, you can still schedule an event, but it automatically chooses the date based on "Scheduled days from start" that has been configured in Maintenance, and this can not be changed. 
In the **Schedule** tab, there will be “Schedule info” saying “Scheduled automatically for xx/xx/xx”, and the user can click  **Schedule** button.

### Ask user to complete program when stage is complete { #ask-user-to-complete-program-when-stage-is-complete } 
If this flag has been enabled for the stage in Stage details in Maintenance, a modal will show up after the user checks the **Complete** event checkbox and clicks save.

![](resources/images/ask-user-to-complete-enrollment-edit-event.png)

#### View mode { #view-mode } 

When the form is in the view mode the title of the page will appear as: `Enrollment: View Event`. You can see in the page all the information related to the event. Click the `Edit event` button to switch to the edit mode. 
This mode is bypassed for events that are scheduled.

![](resources/images/enrollment-event-view-edit-view.png)

#### Edit mode { #edit-mode } 

When the form is in the edit mode the title of the page will appear as: `Enrollment: Edit Event`. You can modify the event and click the `Save` button. Click the `Cancel` button to switch to the view mode without saving the changes.
Scheduled events are are the exception and they are opened in edit mode directly, without the user having to click `Edit event`. Click the `Cancel` button to go back to the enrollment dashboard page without saving the changes.

![](resources/images/enrollment-event-view-edit-edit.png)

In this form you can also delete the event by clicking `Delete` button, a modal will appear to confirm if you want to delete this event. You will then be navigated back to Enrollment dashboard page.

![](resources/images/enrollment-edit-event-delete.png)

#### Widgets in View/Edit event page { #widgets-in-viewedit-event-page } 

The widgets seen in the right-hand column will display and function the same way as mentioned in the [enrollment dashboard](#enrollment-dashboard).

##### Widget assignee { #widget-assignee } 
1. In View/Edit enrollment event page

2. In the right column you will find the assignee widget.

    ![](resources/images/user_assignment_edit_enrollment.png)

3. Click the **Edit** button, or the **Assign** button if the event is not currently assigned to anyone.

    ![](resources/images/user_assignment_edit_button.png)

    ![](resources/images/user_assignment_edit_add.png)

4. Search for and select the user you would like to reassign the event to. Click the **Save** button.

![](resources/images/enrollment-event-view-edit-widgets.png)

## Enrollment event new page { #enrollment-event-new-page } 

You can reach this page add event page by clicking in the **New {stage event name}** button in the overview page. 
In this page you can switch between different tabs: **Report** to add new event, **Schedule** to schedule an event and **Refer** to refer event.
If you have unsaved changes in one tab and switch to another tab, there will be a warning displayed.

### New event widget form { #new-event-widget-form } 

This is the form where you can modify the event details before saving. In the header you can see the stage name and icon.

![](resources/images/new-event-widget-form-header.png)

### New event page without a stage { #new-event-page-without-a-stage } 

If you enter the new event page with no stage selected, a list of available stages will be displayed.
Select the stage you want to add a new event in by clicking the associated button.
To navigate back to the enrollment overview, click the **Cancel without saving**-button

![](resources/images/enrollment-event-new-stage-selection-list.png)

### Ask user to complete program when stage is complete { #ask-user-to-complete-program-when-stage-is-complete } 
If this flag has been enabled for the stage in Stage details in Maintenance, a modal will show up after the user clicks the **Complete** button.

![](resources/images/ask-user-to-complete-enrollment-new-event.png)

### Ask user to create new event when stage is complete { #ask-user-to-create-new-event-when-stage-is-complete } 
If this flag has been enabled for the stage in Stage details in Maintenance, a modal will show up after the user clicks the **Complete** button or checks the **Complete** event checkbox and clicks save. The user can choose the button **Yes, create new event** to navigate to the New Event page or **No, cancel** to navigate back to the enrollment dashboard. If there is only one possible stage available, the user will be taken directly to the New event workspace for that stage.


### Assigning user to new events { #assigning-user-to-new-events } 
When reporting or scheduling an event, you can assign a user to it. This feature must be enabled per program stage in a tracker program by clicking the "Allow user assignment of events" check box.

Você encontrará a seção responsável perto da parte inferior da página de entrada de dados. Pesquise e selecione o usuário ao qual deseja atribuir o evento. O responsável será preservado quando você salvar o evento.

![](resources/images/user_assignment_report_new.png)

![](resources/images/user_assignment_schedule_new_filled.png)

### Schedule event widget form { #schedule-event-widget-form } 
Instead of reporting an event the user can select to schedule an event for later. The form will open with a suggested scheduled date. This date is determined by a set of rules as explained below.

The suggested date for the first event of a program stage in an enrollment is always based on the enrollment date or the incident date (depending on the program configuration). The program stage configuration setting "scheduled days from start" will be added to the base date to cumpute the suggested date.

#### 1. **Default next scheduled date** { #1-default-next-scheduled-date } 
If a program stage has a default next scheduled date configured, the suggested date is the most recent next scheduled date. Below is an example of how this can work.
>
1. A data element with value type date needs to be created and assigned to the particular program stage with access to future dates. The name of the data element could for example be: Next suggested follow up date. The program stage is configured to use the data element as default when scheduling a new event by assigning the data element to default next scheduled date.

![](resources/images/schedule_event_01.png)

2. A program rule based on the data entered in the program stage, will determine how many days until the next suggested follow up will be. For example: A program rule with the following condition: #{penta_dose} == '1' (The program rule will trigger when the TEI has received Penta Dose 1), Assign value to the data element: next suggested follow up date with expression: d2:addDays(V{event_date}, '30') **The number suggest how many days from event date the next scheduled event should be.** 

3. Open the Capture app and create a TEI. As long as Penta Dose has value Dose 1, the suggested next scheduled event is 30 days forward from event date. When scheduling a new event, the system will pick up from the data element as long it has value.

![](resources/images/schedule_event_02.png)

![](resources/images/schedule_event_03.png)

![](resources/images/schedule_event_04.png)

User can also find more information about how many events that scheduled on the same selected date or the interval of selected date and the suggested date from the information box.

Below the schedule date entry, user can choose to add a note to the scheduled event.

After clicking **Schedule** button, user will be navigated back to enrollment overview page.

#### 2. **Standard interval days**  { #2-standard-interval-days } 

1. If the program stage has standard interval days configured, the suggested date is calculated by the most recent event date plus the standard interval days value. 

![](resources/images/standard_interval_days_01.png)

2. If the program stage do not have a default next scheduled date configured, the system will use the standard interval days to calculate the next scheduled event date. 

![](resources/images/standard_interval_days_02.png)


#### 3. **If no value is found on either, the suggested date will be defined by enrollment date and incident date.**  { #3-if-no-value-is-found-on-either-the-suggested-date-will-be-defined-by-enrollment-date-and-incident-date } 

1. In case the option **Generate events based on enrollment date** is checked in the Maintenance app, the next suggested event date is calculated by the enrollment date plus the value of scheduled days from start. 

![](resources/images/schedule_event_from_enrollmentdate_01.png)

2. In case the option **Show incident date** is checked, the next suggested event date is calculated by the incident date plus the value of scheduled days from start.

![](resources/images/schedule_event_from_incidentdate_01.png)

## Program stage event list  { #program-stage-event-list } 

You can reach the program stage event list by clicking **Go to full {stage event name}** button in the overview page.

### Stage Event list  { #stage-event-list } 

In this view you can see all events in a stage 

#### Stage Event list header { #stage-event-list-header } 

In the header, you can see the stage name and icon 

![](resources/images/program-stage-event-list-header.png)

## Attribute option combo for Tracker { #attribute-option-combo-for-tracker } 

You can add segregation to your Tracker event data using attribute option combos. To get started, add a category combination to your Tracker program configuration.

The attribute option combo selector will be displayed when you are adding or changing/viewing Tracker events. Additionally, the selector will be displayed when enrolling if events are being auto-generated as part of the enrollment process.

Example from new Tracker event:

![](resources/images/attribute-option-combo-tracker.png)


# Usando o aplicativo Event Capture { #event_capture_app } 

## Sobre o aplicativo Event Capture { #about_event_capture_app } 

![](resources/images/event_capture/event_list.png)

In the **Event Capture** app you register events that occurred at a
particular time and place. An event can happen at any given point in
time. This stands in contrast to routine data, which can be captured for
predefined, regular intervals. Events are sometimes called cases or
records. In DHIS2, events are linked to a program. The **Event Capture**
app lets you select the organisation unit and program and specify a date
when a event happened, before entering information for the event.

The **Event Capture** app works online and offline. If the Internet
connectivity drops, you can continue to capture events. The events will
be stored locally in your web browser (client). When connectivity has
returned, the system will ask you to upload the locally stored data. The
system then sends the data to the server where the data is stored.

> **Note**
> 
> If you close the web browser while in offline mode, it is not possible
> to reopen a new web browser window and continue the working session.
> However the data will still be saved locally and can be uploaded to
> the server the next time the machine is online and the you have logged
> into the server.

  - You only see programs associated with the organisation unit you've
    selected and programs you've access to view through your user role.

  - Both skip-logic and validation error/warning messages are supported
    during registration.

  - When you close an organisation unit, you can't register or edit
    events to this organisation unit in the **Event Capture** app. You
    can still view and filter the event list and view the details of an
    event.

  - On-the-fly indicator expression evaluation is supported. If a
    program has indicators defined for it and the moment all values
    related to the indicator expression are filled, the system will
    calculate indicator and display the result.

    ![](resources/images/event_capture/event_editing.png)

  - **Sorting:** this can be done by clicking the sorting icon of each
    column header. A red sorting icon implies the current sorting
    column. However, the sorting functionality works only within the
    page displayed. Currently, it is not possible to do sorting from
    serverside.

  - **Filtering:** this is done by clicking the small search icon shown
    to the right of each column header. Clicking them provides an input
    field to type a filtering criteria. The system starts applying the
    filter the moment a user starts to type. During filtering it is
    possible to define start and end dates for date type data elements
    and lower and upper limits for number types. Server side filtering
    is not-support at the moment.

## Cadastre um evento { #event_capture_register_event } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Event Capture **.

2.  Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3.  Selecione um programa.

    You'll only see programs associated with the selected organisation
    unit and programs you've access to through your user role.

4.  Clique em ** Registrar evento **.

5.  Selecione uma data.

6.  Preencha as informações necessárias.

    If the program's program stage is configured to capture GPS
    coordinate, you can enter the coordinates in two ways:

      - Insira os valores diretamente nos campos correspondentes.

      - Choose a location in a map. The map option also displays
        polygons and points that are defined for organisation units.

7.  Clique em ** Salvar e adicionar novo ** ou ** Salvar e voltar **.

> Note: Some data elements in an event might be mandatory (marked with a red star next to the data element lable).
> What this means is that all mandatory data elements must be filled in before the user is allowed to save the event.
> The exception to this is if the user has the authority called __"Ignore validation of required fields in Tracker and Event Capture".__
> If the user has this authority, the mandatory data elements will not be required to be filled in before saving and
> the red star will not be displayed next to the data element lable. Note that super user that have the __"ALL"__ authority automatically
> have this authority.

## Editar um evento { #event_capture_edit_event } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Event Capture **.

2.  Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3.  Selecione um programa.

    Todos os eventos registrados no programa selecionado aparecem em uma lista.

4.  Clique no evento que deseja modificar e selecione ** Editar **.

5.  Modifique os detalhes do evento e clique em ** Atualizar **.

## Editar eventos na grade { #event_capture_edit_event_grid } 

The **Edit in grid** function allows you to edit a selected event within
the table but only those columns (data elements) visible in the grid. If
you need more columns, use **Show/hide columns** to specify which
columns should be displayed in the list.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Event Capture **.

2.  Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3.  Selecione um programa.

    Todos os eventos registrados no programa selecionado aparecem em uma lista.

4.  Clique no evento que deseja modificar e selecione ** Editar na grade **.

5.  Modifique os detalhes do evento.

6.  Clique em outro evento para fechar o modo de edição.

## Compartilhe eventos no modo de edição { #event_capture_share_event_edit_mode } 

Você pode compartilhar um evento no modo de edição por meio de seu endereço da web.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Event Capture **.

2.  Abra o evento que deseja compartilhar no modo de edição.

3.  Copie o URL.

    Make sure that the URL contains "event" and "ou" (organisation unit)
    parameters.

4.  Paste the URL in the sharing method of your choice, for example an
    e-mail or a message within DHIS2.

    If you're not logged in to DHIS2 when you click the link, you'll be
    asked to do so and then taken to the dashboard.

## Ver um histórico de auditoria de evento { #event_capture_view_event_audit_history } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Event Capture **.

2.  Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3.  Selecione um programa.

    Todos os eventos registrados no programa selecionado aparecem em uma lista.

4.  Clique em um evento e selecione ** Histórico de auditoria **.

## Excluir um evento { #event_capture_delete_event } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Event Capture **.

2.  Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3.  Selecione um programa.

    Todos os eventos registrados no programa selecionado aparecem em uma lista.

4.  Clique em um evento e selecione ** Remover **.

5.  Clique em ** Remover ** para confirmar a exclusão.

## Modificar o layout de uma lista de eventos { #event_capture_modify_event_list_layout } 

You can select which columns to show or hide in an event list. This can
be useful for example when you have a long list of data elements
assigned to a program stage. Once you've modified the layout, it's saved
on your user profile. You can have different layouts for different
programs.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Event Capture **.

2.  Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3.  Selecione um programa.

    Todos os eventos registrados no programa selecionado aparecem em uma lista.

4.  Clique no ícone ** Mostrar / ocultar colunas **.

5.  Selecione as colunas que deseja exibir e clique em ** Fechar **.

## Imprimir uma lista de eventos { #event_capture_print_event_list } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Event Capture **.

2.  Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3.  Selecione um programa.

    Todos os eventos registrados no programa selecionado aparecem em uma lista.

4.  Clique em ** Imprimir lista **.

## Baixe uma lista de eventos { #event_capture_download_event_list } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Event Capture **.

2.  Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3.  Selecione um programa.

    Todos os eventos registrados no programa selecionado aparecem em uma lista.

4.  Clique no ícone ** Downlad ** e selecione um formato.

    Você pode baixar uma lista de eventos nos formatos XML, JSON ou CSV.




# Usando o aplicativo Tracker Capture { #tracker_capture_app } 

## Sobre o aplicativo Tracker Capture { #about_tracker_capture_app } 

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tracker-capture-tei-list.png)

The **Tracker Capture** app is an advanced version of the **Event
Capture** app.

  - **Event Capture**: handles single events *without* registration

  - **Tracker Capture**: handles multiple events (including single
    event) *with* registration.

  - You capture event data for a registered tracked entity instance
    (TEI).

  - You only see programs associated with the organisation unit you've
    selected and programs you've access to view through your user role.

  - The options you see in the search and register functions depend on
    the program you've selected. The program attributes control these
    options. The attributes also decide the columns names in the TEI
    list.

    Se você não selecionar um programa, o sistema escolherá os atributos padrão.

  - Both skip-logic and validation error/warning messages are supported
    during registration.

  - When you close an organisation unit, you can't register or edit
    events to this organisation unit in the **Tracker Capture** app. You
    can still search for TEIs and filter the search results. You can
    also view the dashboard of a particular TEI.

## Sobre painéis de instância de entidade rastreada (TEI) { #about_tracked_entity_instance_dashboard } 

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tei_dashboard.png)

Você gerencia um TEI a partir do painel do TEI no aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

  - The dashboard consist of widgets. Drag and drop the widgets to place
    them in the order and in the position you want.

  - Click the pin icon to stick the right column of widgets to a fix
    position. This is useful especially during data entry.

    If you have many data elements or big form to fill in, stick the
    right widget column. Then all the widgets you've placed in the right
    column remain visible while you scroll in the data entry part.

  - Any indicator defined for the program you've selected will have its
    value calculated and displayed in the **Indicators** widget.

  - Navegação:

      - ** Voltar **: leva você de volta à página de pesquisa e registro

      - Previous and next buttons: takes you to the previous or next TEI
        dashboard in the TEI search results list

    <!-- end list -->

      - **Other programs** field: if the TEI is enrolled in other
        programs, they're listed here. Click a program to change the
        program for which you enter data for the selected TEI. When you
        change programs, the content in the widgets change too.

## Fluxo de Trabalho { #workflow_tracker_capture } 

Working process of Mother and child health
program

![](resources/images/patients_programs/name_based_information_tracking_process.png)

1.  Crie um novo ou encontre um TEI existente.

    Você pode pesquisar em atributos definidos, por exemplo nome ou endereço.

2.  Inscreva o TEI em um programa.

3.  Based on the services of the program by the time, the app creates an
    activity plan for the TEI.

4.  The TEI is provided with various services depending on the program.
    All services are recorded.

5.  Use informações sobre os casos individuais para criar relatórios.

## Vinculando ao aplicativo Tracker Capture { #linking_to_the_tracker_capture_app } 

### Link para um programa específico na "tela inicial" { #link-to-a-specific-program-on-the-home-screen } 
Você pode compartilhar uma seleção de programa na "tela inicial.

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2. Select the program you want to link to.

3. Copie o URL.

    * Certifique-se de que o URL contém o parâmetro "programa".

4. Paste the URL in the sharing method of your choice, for example an
  e-mail or a message within DHIS2.

  > Note: If the program does not exist in the selected organisation unit (that is stored in the local cache) the system will instead
  > select the first available program for that organisation unit. If the local cache is empty/clean and the root organisation unit
  > of the current user does not have the specified program, the system will also here select the first available program for the root
  > organisation unit.

### Vinculando ao painel TEI { #linking-to-tei-dashboard } 
Você pode compartilhar um painel TEI por meio de seu endereço da web.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra o painel que você deseja compartilhar.

3.  Copie o URL.

    Make sure that the URL contains "tei", "program" and "ou"
    (organisation unit) parameters.

4.  Paste the URL in the sharing method of your choice, for example an
    e-mail or a message within DHIS2.

    If you're not logged in to DHIS2 when you click the link, you'll be
    asked to do so and then taken to the dashboard.

## Crie um TEI e inscreva-o em um programa { #create_and_enroll_tracked_entity_instance } 

Você pode criar um TEI e inscrever esse TEI em um programa em uma operação:

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  In the organisation unit tree in the left hand pane, select an
    organisation unit.

3.  Selecione um programa.

4.  Clique em ** Registrar **.

5.  Preencha as informações necessárias.

    Both tracked entity type and program can be configured to use a feature type.
    This makes it possible to capture geometry for either the TEI or the enrollment.
    Supported feature type is Point and Polygon. Please see **How to use geometry**.

6. If the selected program is configured to display first stage during registration, 
   all mandatory fields in the stage will have to be filled in. At the end of the stage
   you will also be asked if you want to complete the stage that you have entered data for.
   If you select **Yes**, the stage will have the status completed once saved. If you select **No**, 
   the stage will have the status active.

7.  If searching for program is configured, a background search will be
    performed on searchable fields to help you prevent registering
    duplicates. If there is any matching TEIs, a blue box will be
    displayed on the right side of the form with the possibility to view
    these matching
TEIs.

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tracker_capture_register_integrated_search.png)

If there is any matching TEIs, click **Continue** to review possible
duplicates before registering a new one.

If there is no matching TEIs, click **Save and continue** or **Save and
add new**

  - **Save and continue**: completes the registration and opens the
    registered TEI's dashboard

  - **Save and add new**: completes the registration but stays on the
    same page. Use this option when you want to register and enroll one
    TEI after another without enter data.

> Note: All mandatory attributes have to be filled in to be able to save. 
> Mandatory attributes are marked with a red star next to the attribute label.
> If the user has the authority called __"Ignore validation of required fields in Tracker and Event Capture"__
> you will not be required to fill in the mandatory attributes and will 
> not see the red star next to the attribute label. Note that super user 
> that have the __"ALL"__ authority automatically have this authority.

## Abra um painel TEI existente { #open_existing_tracked_entity_instance_dashboard } 

There are multiple ways to find a TEI: Using the "Lists" which is
predefined lists in the current selection, or "Search" for global
lookup.

### Listas { #simple_tracked_entity_instance_search } 

Lists is used to find and display TEIs in the selected organisation unit
and program.

1.  Abra o aplicativo de captura rastreada

2.  In the organisation unit tree in the left hand pane, select an
    organisation unit

3.  Selecione um programa

4.  Clique no botão "Listas" se ainda não estiver selecionado

Se não for configurado, um conjunto de listas predefinidas estará disponível:

1.  Qualquer TEI com qualquer status de inscrição

2.  TEIs com uma inscrição ativa do programa atual

3.  TEIs com inscrição concluída no programa atual

4.  TEIs com inscrição cancelada do programa atual

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tracker_capture_lists.png)

You can select which columns to show or hide in the lists for each
program. This will be saved in your user settings.

1.  Clique no botão do ícone ** grade **

2.  Verifique as colunas que deseja incluir

3.  Clique em ** Salvar **

There is also an option to create a custom working list with own
filters. This can be used to create custom lists on the fly.

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tracker_capture_lists_custom.png)

As listas também podem ser baixadas ou impressas.

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tracker_capture_lists_download.png)

#### Listas predefinidas personalizadas { #custom-predefined-lists } 

If the program has any custom tracked entity filters associated with it,
these will take the place of the four predefined lists mentioned above.
The predefined lists will when well configured be an effective way to find
or work with the data relevant for the user in that program.

Working lists can be defined with a wide variety of options, here are some
examples:

- Display all TEIs with at least one event in a given program stage that has a due date on the current date.
- Display all TEIs that has at least one event that is assigned to the logged in user.
- Exibe todos os TEIs ativos, mas não atribuídos a nenhum usuário.

![Predefined working lists in tracker capture](resources/images/tracker_capture/predefined_working_list_based_on_user_assignment.png)

See the API documentation for a full list of functionality supported for
these predefined tracked entity instance filters.

### Procurar { #advanced_tracked_entity_instance_search } 

Search is used to search for TEIs in the organisation units the user has
search access to. This can be used if you want to find a TEI, but you
don't know which organisation unit or program the TEI was enrolled in.
There are two ways of doing this: With and without a program context.
Searchable fields needs to be configured. For configuring searching with
program context, this is done individually for each program in the
program maintenance app. For configuring searching without a program
context, this is done individually for each tracked entity type in the
tracked entity type maintenance app.

** Pesquisando sem um contexto de programa: **

1.  Abra o ** aplicativo Tracker Capture **

2.  Clique no botão ** Pesquisar **

3.  Searchable fields will be displayed in groups. Unique attributes is
    only individually searchable. Non-unique attributes can be combined.

4.  Preencha os critérios de pesquisa e clique no botão do ícone ** pesquisar **.

** Pesquisando com um contexto de programa: **

1.  Abra o ** aplicativo Tracker Capture **

2.  Select an organisation unit which has the program you wish to search
    in

3.  Selecione o programa

4.  Clique no botão ** Pesquisar **

5.  Searchable fields will be displayed in groups. Unique attributes is
    only individually searchable. Non-unique attributes can be combined.

6.  Preencha os critérios de pesquisa e clique no botão do ícone ** pesquisar **

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tracker_capture_search_screen.png)

After the search has been done, you will be presented with the search
result. Whats displayed depends on the outcome of the search.

Para pesquisa de atributo exclusivo:

  - If no matching TEI found, you will get the possibility to open the
    registration form.

  - If the TEI was found in the selected organisation unit, the TEI
    dashboard will automatically open.

  - If the TEI was found in outside the selected organisation unit, you
    will get the possibility to open the TEI.

Para pesquisa de atributos não exclusivos:

  - If no matching TEI's found, you will get the possibility to open the
    registration form.

  - If matching TEI's found, you can either click on any TEI in the
    result list, or open the registration form.

  - If a too large number of matches was found, you will be prompted to
    refine your search criteria

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tracker_capture_search_results.png)

The search results have functionality for flagging tracked entity instances
as possible duplicates, see next chapter.

When choosing to open the registration form, the search values will
automatically be filled into the registration form.

### Sinalizando instância de entidade rastreada como possível duplicata { #flagging-tracked-entity-instance-as-potential-duplicate } 

When searching for tracked entity instances in the tracker capture app, the user
will sometimes suspect that one or more of the search hits are duplicates of
other tracked entity instances. The user has the option of clicking on the
**flag possible duplicate** link in the rightmost column of the search result grid.

Tracked entity instances flagged in this way will be marked as "possible duplicate"
in the DHIS2 database. The flag indicates that the tracked entity instance is/has a
duplicate. The presence of such a flag is visible to the user in two places. One is
the result list itself (in this example Mark Robinson is already flagged as a potential
duplicate):

![Tracker capture search results](resources/images/tracker_capture/tracker_capture_search_results.png)

O outro lugar é dentro do painel da instância da entidade rastreada:

![Tracked entity instance flagged as duplicate](resources/images/tracker_capture/tracked_entity_instance_flagged_as_duplicate.png)

In addition to informing users about the tracked entity instance potentially
being a duplicate, the  flag will be used by the underlying system for finding and
merging duplicates in coming versions of DHIS2.

### Quebrando o vidro { #break_glass } 

If the program is configured with access level **protected**, and the
user searches and finds tracked entity instances that is owned by
organisation unit that the user does not have data capture authority
for, the user is presented with the option of breaking the glass. The
user will give a reason for breaking the glass, then gain temporary
ownership of the tracked entity
instance.

## Inscreva-se em um TEI existente em um programa { #enroll_existing_tracked_entity_instance_in_program } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  Selecione um programa.

4.  No widget ** Enrollment **, clique em ** Add new **.

5.  Preencha as informações necessárias e clique em ** Inscrever-se **.

## Insira os dados do evento para um TEI { #enter_event_data_for_tracked_entity_instance } 

### Widgets para entrada de dados { #widgets-for-data-entry } 

#### 

In a TEI dashboard, you enter event data in the **Timeline Data entry**
or **Tabular data entry** widgets.



Table: Data entry widgets in the Tracker Capture app

| Widget name | Descrição |
|---|---|
| **Timeline Data entry** | For data entry using either default or custom forms.<br> <br>Depending on program definition, in particular program stages, events will be displayed in a timely fashion. Clicking on any of them displays the corresponding data entry. If a stage needs new event, a plus icon is displayed for new event creation. To proceed with data entry, it is mandatory to have event date. Once an event date is specified it is not possible to change due date. The assumption is that by specifying event date, the event has already taken place. If the event hasn't occurred yet, it is possible to change due date - this is effectively doing nothing but rescheduling. The buttons at the bottom help to change the status of a selected event.<br> <br>Another key feature from this widget is addition of multiple notes for an event. Normally data recording is through data elements, however there are cases where it is necessary to record additional information or comments. This is where the notes section comes handy. However it is not possible to delete a note. The idea is notes are more like log books. Both skip-logic and validation error/warning messages are supported during data entry.<br> <br>Also included in the Timeline Data entry is the option to compare your data entry to previous entries. This can be enabled by clicking the "Switch to compare form" button (Two sheets of paper) in the top right corner of the Timeline Data entry widget. |
| **Tabular data entry** | For tabular-style data entry.<br> <br>The widget displays the list of program stages as left-hand side labels. Events will be listed in table for repeatable program stage, and allows for in-line edits of event data values. |

### Criação de um evento { #creating-an-event } 

Você pode criar um evento para um TEI:

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  In the **Timeline Data entry** or **Tabular data entry** widget,
    click the **+**-button.

4.  Select a **Program stage** and set a **Report date**.

    Program stages can be configured to use a feature type.
    This makes it possible to capture geometry for an event.
    Supported feature type is Point and Polygon. Please see **How to use geometry**.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Agende um evento { #schedule-an-event } 

You can schedule an event for a future date by:

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  In the **Timeline Data entry** or **Tabular data entry** widget,
    click the **Calendar** icon.

4.  Select a **Program stage** and set a **Schedule date**.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Indique um evento { #refer-an-event } 

Sometimes it might be necessary to refer a patient to a different
**Organisation unit**. To refer a TEI:

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  In the **Timeline Data entry** or **Tabular data entry** widget,
    click the **Arrow** icon.

4.  Select a **Program stage**, **Organisation unit** and set a
    ****Report date****.

5.  Click either **One-time referral** which will only refer TEI for one
    single event or **Move permanently** which will move TEI ownership
    to the selected **Organisation Unit**. Further access to the TEI
    will be based on the ownership organisation unit.

### Elementos de dados obrigatórios em eventos { #mandatory-data-elements-in-events } 
Some data elements in an event might be mandatory (marked with a red star next to the data element label).
What this means is that all mandatory data elements must be filled in before the user is allowed to complete the event.
The exception to this is if the user has the authority called __"Ignore validation of required fields in Tracker and Event Capture".__
If the user has this authority, the mandatory data elements will not be required to be filled in before saving and
the red star will not be displayed next to the data element label. Note that super user that have the __"ALL"__ authority automatically
have this authority.

## Como usar geometria { #how-to-use-geometry } 

Tracked entity type, program and program stage can be configured to
use a feature type. This makes it possible to capture geometry for a
TEI, program or event. Supported feature types are Point and Polygon.

### Capturar coordenadas { #capture-coordinate } 
** Opção 1: ** Preencha a latitude e longitude no campo.

**Opção 2:**
1.  Clique no ** ícone do mapa **
2.  Find the location you want by either searching or locating it on
    the map
3.  Clique com o botão direito no local desejado e escolha ** Definir coordenada **
4.  Clique em ** Capturar ** na parte inferior

### Capturar polígono { #capture-polygon } 
1.  Clique no ** ícone do mapa **
2.  Find the location you want by either searching or locating it on
    the map
3.  No canto superior esquerdo do mapa, clique no ** ícone do polígono **
4.  Draw a polygon on the map. To finish, connect the last point with
    the first point
5.  Clique em ** Capturar ** na parte inferior

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/capture_geometry.png)

Os polígonos também podem ser excluídos
1.  Clique no ** ícone do mapa **
2.  Click the **trash can icon** at the left side of the map, and select
    **Clear all**

## Como atribuir um usuário a um evento { #how-to-assign-a-user-to-an-event } 

In the Maintenance App a program stage can be configured to allow user assignment.
If user assignment is enabled, you will be able to assign a user to an event.

1. Clique no campo ** Usuário atribuído **.
2. Role ou pesquise um usuário.
3. Clique no usuário.

## Gerenciar as inscrições de um TEI { #manage_tracked_entity_instance_enrollment } 
The Enrollment widget gives access to information and functionality
for the enrollment in the selected program.

![Enrollments widget](resources/images/tracker_capture/enrollment_widget.png)

### TEI ownership { #tei-ownership } 

The current ownership of all enrollments in the selected program is displayed
in the "Owned by" part of the enrollment widget. The ownership will always start
out as the organisation unit that first enrolled the TEI into the given program.

Ownership can be different for a TEIS different programs, for example one clinic can
follow up a patient in HIV, while another clinic follows up the same patient in MCH.

To update the ownership for a TEI/program combination, the user has to utilize the
referral functionality and select the "Move permanently" option while referring.

A user that has capture access to the organisation unit that is the current owner of the
TEI/Program will have write access to all enrollments for that TEI/Program combination.
A user that has search access to the organisation unit that is the current owner will have
access to search and find the TEI/Program combination.

### Desative a inscrição de um TEI { #deactivate_tracked_entity_instance_enrollment } 

If you deactivate a TEI dashboard, the TEI becomes 'read-only'. You
can't enter data, enroll the TEI or edit the TEI's profile.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  No widget ** Enrollment **, clique em ** Desativar **.

4.  Clique em ** Sim ** para confirmar.

### Ative a inscrição de um TEI { #activate_tracked_entity_instance_enrollment } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  No widget ** Enrollment **, clique em ** Activate **.

4.  Click **Yes** to
confirm.

### Marque a inscrição do TEI como completa { #mark_tracked_entity_instance_enrollment_complete } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  No widget ** Enrollment **, clique em ** Complete **.

4.  Click **Yes** to
confirm.

### Reabrir inscrição concluída { #reopen_complete_tracked_entity_instance_enrollment } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  No widget ** Enrollment **, clique em ** Reaopen **.

4.  Click **Yes** to
confirm.

### Exibir histórico de inscrição do TEI { #display_tracked_entity_instance_enrollment_history } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  No widget ** Perfil **, clique no ícone ** Histórico de auditoria **.

### Crie uma nota de inscrição TEI { #create_tracked_entity_instance_enrollment_note } 

An enrollment note is useful to record information about for example why
an enrollment was cancelled.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  No widget ** Notes **, digite sua nota e clique em ** Add **.

## Envie uma mensagem para um TEI { #send_message_to_tracked_entity_instance } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  No widget ** Mensagens ** e selecione ** SMS ** ou ** E-mail **.

4.  Insira as informações de contato necessárias.

    If the TEI's profile contains an e-mail address or a phone number,
    these fields are filled in automatically.

5.  Digite uma mensagem.

6.  Clique em ** Enviar **.

## Marque um TEI para acompanhamento { #mark_tracked_entity_instance_for_follow_up } 

You can use mark a TEI's enrollment for follow-up and then use this
status as a filter when you create **Upcoming events** and **Overdue
events** reports. This can be useful for example to monitor high-risk
cases during a pregnancy program.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  No widget ** Enrollment **, clique no ícone ** Mark for follow-up **.

## Editar o perfil de um TEI { #edit_tracked_entity_instance_profile } 

You edit a TEI's profile or tracked entity attributes in the **Profile**
widget.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  No widget ** Perfil **, clique em ** Editar **.

4.  Modifique o perfil e clique em ** Salvar **.

## Adicionar um relacionamento a um TEI { #add_relationship_to_tracked_entity_instance } 

You can create a relationship from one TEI to another, for example
linking a mother and a child together or a husband and a wife. Depending
on how the relationship type is configured, the relative can inherit
attributes.

Assume there are two programs: Antenatal care for the mother and
Immunization for the child. If first name, last name and address
attributes are required for both programs, it is possible to configure
last name and address attributes as inheritable. Then during child
registration, there is no need to enter these inheritable attributes.
You can add them automatically based on the mother's value. If you want
to have a different value for the child, you can override the
automatically generated value.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  No widget ** Relacionamentos ** e clique em ** Adicionar **.

4.  Selecione um tipo de relacionamento.

5.  Pesquise o parente e selecione-o. A pesquisa segue o mesmo padrão de busca por instâncias de entidades rastreadas na página inicial do rastreador. As pesquisas cobrem, por padrão, o escopo de pesquisa dos usuários.

6.  Selecione a instância da entidade rastreada que corresponde aos critérios de pesquisa no pop-up.

7.  Clique em **Salvar**.

> Note: If the relationship is a bi-directional relationship, the relationship will be displayed in the TEI that the relationship
> was created in and in the TEI that the relationship was linked to. Also, if the relationship is bi-directional, each end of the
> relationship will have a unique name that will be displayed in the relationship widget under the "Relationship" column.

## Compartilhe um painel TEI { #share_tracked_entity_instance_dashboard } 

Você pode compartilhar um painel TEI por meio de seu endereço da web.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra o painel que você deseja compartilhar.

3.  Copie o URL.

    Make sure that the URL contains "tei", "program" and "ou"
    (organisation unit) parameters.

4.  Paste the URL in the sharing method of your choice, for example an
    e-mail or a message within DHIS2.

    If you're not logged in to DHIS2 when you click the link, you'll be
    asked to do so and then taken to the dashboard.

## Desativar um TEI { #deactivate_tracked_entity_instance } 

If you deactivate a TEI, the TEI becomes 'read-only'. Data associated
with the TEI is not deleted.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  In the top right corner, click the
    ![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tc_tei_red_icon.png) button \>
    **Deactivate**.

4.  Clique em ** Sim ** para confirmar.

## Ative um TEI { #activate_tracked_entity_instance } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  In the upper top corner, click the
    ![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tc_tei_red_icon.png) button \>
    **Activate**.

4.  Clique em ** Sim ** para confirmar.

## Excluir um TEI { #delete_tracked_entity_instance } 

> ** Aviso **
>
> Ao excluir um TEI, você exclui todos os dados associados ao TEI.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  In the top right corner, click the
    ![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tc_tei_red_icon.png) button \>
    **Delete**.

4.  Click **Yes** to
confirm.

## Configure o painel TEI { #configure_tracked_entity_instance_dashboard } 

### Mostrar ou ocultar widgets { #tracked_entity_instance_dashboard_show_hide_widget } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  Clique no ícone ** Configurações ** e selecione ** Mostrar / ocultar widgets **.

4.  Selecione os widgets que você deseja mostrar ou ocultar.

5.  Clique em ** Fechar **.

### Salve o layout do painel como padrão { #tracked_entity_instance_dashboard_save_layout } 

Você pode salvar o layout do painel como padrão para um programa.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  Click the **Settings** icon, and select **Save dashboard layout as
    default**.

### Layout do painel de bloqueio { #lock-dashboards-layout } 

If you are the **administrator** you have the option of locking the
layout of the dashboard for all users.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  Organize the widgets to the desired layout and save it as default
    (see section above).

4.  Click the **Settings** icon, and select **Lock layout for all
    users**.

Users will still be able to reorganize the widgets temporarily, but the
layout will be reset to the admin's saved layout after page refresh. The
remove widget buttons will be hidden when the dashboard layout is
locked.

### Barra superior { #top-bar } 

The top bar can be a helpful tool to see important data in a quick and
easy way. To start using the top bar:

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  Clique no ícone ** Configurações ** e selecione ** Configurações da barra superior **.

4.  Click **Activate top bar** and click the data you would like to
    display in the top bar.

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/top_bar.png)

### Alterar o modo de exibição da tabela para o widget ** Timeline Data Entry ** { #change-table-display-mode-for-timeline-data-entry-widget } 

The **Timeline Data Entry** widget has 5 different table display modes that can be selected. The different options are:
- **Default form** - Shows all data elements vertically.

- **Compare form previous** - Shows the previous (repeatable) program stage next to the current selected program stage.

- **Compare form all** - Shows all previous (repeatable) program stages next to the current selected program stage.

- **Grid form** - Shows the data elements horizontally.

- ** Formulário POP-over ** - O mesmo que ** Formulário de grade **, mas quando clicado, os elementos de dados são exibidos em um pop-up.

Para alterar o modo de exibição atual, clique no segundo ícone na barra superior dos widgets (veja a imagem abaixo):

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/compareForm.png)

Once an option is selected the selection is stored for that specific program stage. This mean that you can have different table modes for the different program stages in a program.  

> **Notes:**
> 1.  *The **Compare form** options will function best if you have multiple repeatable events (of the same program stage) present.*
> 2.  *The **Grid form** and **POP-over form** options are not selectable if the program stage has more than 10 data elements.*
> 3.  *The icon in the widgets bar will change depending on the option you have selected.*

## Crie relatórios { #create_report_tracker_capture } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Clique em ** Relatórios **.

3.  Selecione um tipo de relatório.



    Table: Report types in the Tracker Capture app

    | Report type | Description |
    |---|---|
    | Program summary | A summary report for a particular program, organisation unit and time frame. The report consist of a list of TEIs and their records organised based on program stages. |
    | Program statistics | A statistics report for a particular program. The report provides for example an overview of drop-outs or completion rates in a given time frame at a particular organisation unit. |
    | Upcoming events | A tabular report showing tracked entity instances and their upcoming events for a selected program and time. You can sort the columns and search the values. Show/hide operations are possible on the columns. You can also export the table to Microsoft Excel. |
    | Overdue events | A list of events for a selected program. The report displays a list of TEIs and their events that are not completed on time. You can sort the columns and search the values You can also export the table to Microsoft Excel. |

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/program_summary_report.png)

The summary report displays a list of TEIs and their records for
"MNCH/PNC (Adult Woman)" program. The records are organized in the form
of tabs where each tab is a program stage. The columns in the table are
data elements which are configured to be displayed in reports under
program stage definition.




# Data approval overview { #data_approval_overview } 

DHIS2 has an optional feature that allows authorized users to approve
data that has been entered. It allows data to be reviewed and approved
at selected levels in the organisation unit hierarchy, so the approval
follows the structure of the hierarchy from lower levels to higher
levels.

Data is approved for a combination of (a) period, (b) organisation unit
and (c) workflow. Data may be approved for the organisation unit for
which it is entered, as well as for higher-level organisation units to
which the data is aggregated. As part of system settings, you can choose
the organisation unit level(s) at which data is approved. It can be
approved at higher levels only after it has been approved for all that
organisation unit's descendants at lower levels for the same workflow
and period. When you approve a workflow, it approves data for any data
sets that have been assigned to that workflow.

After a period, organisation unit and workflow combination has been
approved, data sets associated with that workflow will be locked for
that period and organisation unit, and any further data entry or
modification will be prohibited unless it is first un-approved.

For example, the following diagram illustrates that data has already
been approved for organisation units C and D, for a given period and
workflow. It may now be approved for organisation unit B for the same
period and workflow. But it is not ready to be approved for organization
unit A. Before it can be approved for organisation unit A, it must be
approved for B, and for any other children of organisation unit A, for
that period and workflow.

![Approving at organisation
units](resources/images/data_approval/approval_hierarchy.png){.center width=50% }

## Aprovando e aceitando { #data_approvals_approving_accepting } 

DHIS2 supports two different types of approval processes: either a
one-step process where the data is approved at each level, or a two-step
process where data is first approved and then accepted at each level.
This is illustrated in the following diagram:

![Approving and
accepting](resources/images/data_approval/approval_level_steps.png){.center width=69% }

In the one-step process, data is approved at one level, and then
approved at the next higher level. Until it is approved at the next
higher level, it may be unapproved at the first level. (For example, if
the data was approved my mistake, this allows the approver to undo their
mistake.) Once the data is approved at the next higher level, it may not
be unapproved at the lower level unless it is first unapproved at the
higher level.

In the two-step process, data is approved at one level, and then the
approval is accepted at the same level. This acceptance is done by a
user who is authorized to approve data at the next higher level. Once
the data is accepted, it may not be changed or unapproved unless it is
first *unaccepted*.

The two-step process is not required by DHIS2. It is an optional step
for a user reviewing data at the next higher level. It has the benefit
of locking the acceptance from the level below, so reviewer does not
have to worry that the data could be changing from below while it is
being reviewed. It can also be used by the higher-level user to keep
track of which lower-level data has already been reviewed.

Two-step process can be activated by checking **Acceptance required
before approval** in SystemSettings app under General section.

## Autoridades para aprovação de dados { #data_approvals_authorities } 

To approve data, you must be assigned a role containing one of these
authorities:

  - **Approve data** - You may approve data for the organisation unit(s)
    to which you are assigned. Note that this authority does not allow
    you to approve data for lower-levels below the organisation unit(s)
    to which you are assigned. This is useful to separate the users
    authorized to approve at one level from the users authorized to
    approve at levels below.

  - **Approve data at lower levels** - Allows you to approve data for
    all lower levels below the organisation units assigned to you. This
    is useful if, for example, you are a district-level user whose role
    includes approving the data for all the facilities within that
    district, but not for the district itself. If you are assigned this
    as well as the *Approve data* authority, you may approve data at the
    level of the organisation unit(s) to which you have been assigned,
    and for any level below.

  - **Accept data at lower levels** - Allows you to accept data for the
    level just below the organisation unit(s) assigned to you. This
    authority can be given to the same users as approve data. Or it may
    be given to different users, if you want to have some users who
    accept data from the level below, and a different set of users who
    approve data to go up to the next level above.

## Configurando a aprovação de dados { #data_approvals_configuration } 

In the *Maintenance app* section under *Data approval level* you can
specify the levels at which you want to approve data in the system.
Click the Add new button on this page and select the organisation unit
level at which you want approvals. It will be added to the list of
approval settings. You may configure the system for approving data at
every organisation unit level, or only at selected organisation unit
levels.

Note that when you add a new approval level, you may optionally choose a
Category option group set. This feature is discussed later in this
chapter.

Also in maintenance under *Data approval workflow*, you can define the
workflows that will be used for approving data. Each workflow can be
associated with one or more approval levels. Any two workflows may
operate at all the same approval levels as each other, some of the same
and some different levels, or completely different levels.

If you want data for a data set to be approved according to a workflow,
then assign the workflow to the data set when you add or edit the data
set. If you do not want data for a data set to be subject to approval,
then do not assign any workflow to that data set. For data sets that you
want to approve at the same time as each other, assign them to the same
workflow. For data sets that you want to approve independently, assign
each data set to its own workflow.

Under *System Settings* -> *Analytics*, you can control what unapproved data (if any) will appear in analytics. See the "Analytics settings" section of this user guide. Note that users who are assigned to organisation units where data is ready for approval can alwyas view this data in analytics, as can users assigned to higher-level organisation units if they have the *Approve data at lower levels* authority or the *View unapproved data* authority.

## Visibilidade de dados { #data_approvals_data_visibility } 

If the option *Hide unapproved data in analytics* is enabled, data will
be hidden from viewing by users associated with higher levels. When
determining whether a data record should be hidden for a specific user,
the system associates a user with a specific approval level and compares
it to the level to which the data record has been approved up to. A user
is associated with the approval level which matches the level of the
organisation unit(s) she is linked to, or if no approvel level exists at
that level, the next approval level linked to an organisation unit level
below herself. A user will be allowed to see data which has been
approved up to the level immediately below her associated approval
level. The rationale behind this is that a user must be ablet to view
the data that has been approved below so that she can eventually view
and approve it herself.

Note that if the user has been granted the *View unapproved data* or the
*ALL* authority she will be able to view data irrespective of the
approval status.

*Lets consider the following example:* There are four organisation unit
levels, with approval levels associated with level 2 and 4. *User A* at
country level (1) gets associated with approval level 1 since the
approval level exists at the same level as the organisation unit level.
*User B* gets associated with approval level 2 since there is no
approval level directly linked to her organisation unit level and
approval level 2 is the immediate level below. *User C* gets associated
with approval level 2. *User D* is below all approval levels which
implies that she can see all data entered at or below her organisation
unit level.

![Hiding of unapproved
data](resources/images/data_approval/approval_data_hiding.png){.center}

Usando este exemplo, vamos considerar alguns cenários:

  - Data is entered at facility level: Only *User D* can see the data,
    as the data has not yet been approved at all.

  - Data is approved by *User D* at facility level: Data becomes visible
    to User C and User B, as the data is now approved at their level.

  - Data is approved by *User C* at district level: Data becomes visible
    to User A, as data is now approved at the level immediately below
    herself.

## Aprovando dados { #data_approvals_approving_data } 

To approve data, go to *Reports* and choose *Data Approval*. When this
report shows data that is configured for approval, it shows the approval
status of the data in the report. The approval status will be one of the
following:

  - **Waiting for lower level org units to approve** - This data is not
    yet ready to be approved, because it first needs to be approved for
    all the child organisation units to this organisation unit, for the
    same workflow and period.

  - **Ready for approval** - This data may now be approved by an
    authorized user.

  - ** Aprovado ** - Este dado já foi aprovado.

  - **Approved and accepted** - This data has already been approved, and
    also accepted.

If the data you are viewing is in an approval state that can be acted
upon, and if you have sufficient authority, one or more of the following
actions will be available to you on the *Data Approval* form:

  - **Approve** - Approve data that has not yet been approved, or that
    was formerly approved and has been unapproved.

  - **Unapprove** - Return to an unapproved state data that has been
    approved or accepted.

  - ** Aceitar ** - Aceita os dados que foram aprovados.

  - **Unaccept** - Return to an unaccepted (but still approved) state
    data that has been accepted.

In order to unapprove data for a given organisation unit, you must have
the authority to approve data for that organisation unit or to approve
data for a higher-level organisation unit to which that data is
aggregated. The reason for this is as follows: If you are reviewing data
for approval at a higher organisation unit level, you should consider
whether the data at lower organisation units are reasonable. If all
lower-level data looks good, you can approve the data at the higher
level. If some lower-level data looks suspect, you can unapprove the
data at the lower level. This allows the data to be reviewed again at
the lower level, corrected if necessary, and re-approved up through the
organisation unit levels according to the hierarchy.

## Aprovação por grupo de opções de categoria definido { #data_approvals_approving_by_cogs } 

When defining an approval level, you specify the organisation unit level
at which data will be approved. You may also optionally specify a
category option group set. This is useful if you are using category
option groups to define additional dimensions of your data, and you want
approvals to be based on these dimensions. The following examples
illustrate how this can be done within a single category option group
set, and by using multiple category option group sets.

### Aprovação por um grupo de opções de categoria definido { #approving-by-one-category-option-group-set } 

For example, suppose you define a category option group set to represent
NGOs who serve as healthcare partners at one or more organisation units.
Each category option group within this set represents a different
partner. The category option group for Partner 1 may group together
category options (such as funding account codes) that are used by that
partner as a dimension of the data. So data entered by Partner 1 is
attributed to a category option in Partner 1's category option group.
Whereas data entered by partner 2 is attributed to a category option in
Partner 2's category option group:

 <table align="center">
 <caption> Exemplo de grupos de opções de categoria </caption>
 <thead>
 <tr class="header">
 <th> Grupo de opções de categoria definido </th>
 <th> Grupo de opções de categoria </th>
 <th> Opções de categoria </th>
 </tr>
 </thead>
 <tbody>
 <tr class="odd">
 <td> Parceiro </td>
 <td> Parceiro 1 </td>
 <td> Conta 1A, Conta 1B </td>
 </tr>
 <tr class="even">
 <td> Parceiro </td>
 <td> Parceiro 2 </td>
 <td> Conta 2A, Conta 2B </td>
 </tr>
 </tbody>
 </table>

Each partner could enter data for their accounts independently of the
other, for the same or different workflows, at the same or different
facilities. So for example, data can be entered and/or aggregated at the
following levels for each partner, independently of each other:

![Example category option
groups](resources/images/data_approval/approval_partner_example.png){.center}

> **Tip**
> 
> You can use the sharing feature on category options and category
> option groups to insure that a user can enter data (and/or see data)
> only for certain category options and groups. If you don't want users
> to see data that is aggregated beyond of their assigned category
> options and/or category option groups, you can assign *Selected
> dimension restrictions for data analysis*, when adding or updating a
> user.

You can optionally define approval levels for partner data within any or
all of these organisation unit levels. For example, you could define any
or all of the following approval levels:

 <table align="center">
 <caption> Exemplo de categoria Grupo de opções Definir níveis de aprovação </caption>
 <thead>
 <tr class="header">
 <th> Nível de aprovação </th>
 <th> Nível de unidade organizacional </th>
 <th> Grupo de opções de categoria definido </th>
 </tr>
 </thead>
 <tbody>
 <tr class="odd">
 <td> 1 </td>
 <td> País </td>
 <td> Parceiro </td>
 </tr>
 <tr class="even">
 <td> 2 </td>
 <td> Distrito </td>
 <td> Parceiro </td>
 </tr>
 <tr class="odd">
 <td> 3 </td>
 <td> Instalação </td>
 <td> Parceiro </td>
 </tr>
 </tbody>
 </table>

## Aprovação por vários conjuntos de grupos de opções de categoria { #approving_by_multiple_category_option_group_sets } 

You can also define approval levels for different category option group
sets. To continue the example, suppose that you have various agencies
that manage the funding to the different partners. For example, Agency A
funds accounts 1A and 2A, while Agency B funds accounts 1B and 2B. You
could set up category option groups for Agency A, and Agency B, and make
them both part of a category option group set called Agency. So you
would have:

 <table align="center">
 <caption> Exemplo de grupos de opções de várias categorias </caption>
 <thead>
 <tr class="header">
 <th> Grupo de opções de categoria definido </th>
 <th> Grupo de opções de categoria </th>
 <th> Opções de categoria </th>
 </tr>
 </thead>
 <tbody>
 <tr class="odd">
 <td> Parceiro </td>
 <td> Parceiro 1 </td>
 <td> Conta 1A, Conta 1B </td>
 </tr>
 <tr class="even">
 <td> Parceiro </td>
 <td> Parceiro 2 </td>
 <td> Conta 2A, Conta 2B </td>
 </tr>
 <tr class="odd">
 <td> Agência </td>
 <td> Agência A </td>
 <td> Conta 1A, Conta 2A </td>
 </tr>
 <tr class="even">
 <td> Agência </td>
 <td> Agência B </td>
 <td> Conta 1B, Conta 2B </td>
 </tr>
 </tbody>
 </table>

Now suppose that at the country level, you want each partner to approve
the data entered by that partner. Once this approval is done, you want
each agency to then approve the data from accounts that are managed by
that agency. Finally, you want to approve data at the country level
across all agencies. You could do this by defining the following
approval levels:

 <table align="center">
 <caption> Exemplo de grupo de opções de múltiplas categorias Definir níveis de aprovação </caption>
 <thead>
 <tr class="header">
 <th> Nível de aprovação </th>
 <th> Nível de unidade organizacional </th>
 <th> Grupo de opções de categoria definido </th>
 </tr>
 </thead>
 <tbody>
 <tr class="odd">
 <td> 1 </td>
 <td> País </td>
 <td> </td>
 </tr>
 <tr class="even">
 <td> 2 </td>
 <td> País </td>
 <td> Agência </td>
 </tr>
 <tr class="odd">
 <td> 3 </td>
 <td> País </td>
 <td> Parceiro </td>
 </tr>
 </tbody>
 </table>

Note that multiple approval levels can be defined for the same
organisation unit level. In our example, Partner 1 would approve
country-wide data at approval level 3 from category options Account 1A
and Account 1B. Next, Agency A would approve country-wide data at
approval level 2 from category options Account 1A (after approval by
Partner 1) and Account 2A (after approval by Partner 2.) Finally, after
approval from all agencies, country-wide data can be approved at
approval level 1 across all category options. Note that approval level 1
does not specify a category option group set, meaning that it is for
approving data across all category options.

This example is meant to be illustrative only. You may define as many
category option groups as you need, and as many approval levels as you
need at the same organisation unit level for different category option
group sets.

If you have multiple approval levels for different category option group
sets at the same organisation unit level, you may change the approval
ordering in the *Settings* section, under *System Approval Settings*.
Just click on the approval level you wish to move, and select *Move up*
or *Move down*. If you have an approval level with no category option
groups set, it must be the highest approval level for that organisation
unit level.




# Data approval { #data_approval_app }

The **Data Approval** app provides an intuitive interface to support the approval process in line with the configured approval workflows.

## Selecting parameters { #selecting-parameters } 

### Select a workflow { #select-a-workflow } 

Start by selecting a workflow in the top left of the screen. If you only have access to a single workflow, it will be preselected for you.

![Select a workflow](resources/images/select_workflow.png)

### Select a period { #select-a-period } 

Proceed to select a period you would like to approve data for.

![Select a period](resources/images/select_period.png)

### Select an organisation unit { #select-an-organisation-unit } 

Finally, select an organisation unit you would like to approve data for. Each visible organisation unit in the tree is preceded with a status-icon. This icon serves as an indication of the actions available to your user profile for that organisation unit. In the screenshot below, "Badjia" is an organisation unit with status "ready for approval".

![Select an organisation unit](resources/images/select_org_unit.png)

### Clear selection { #clear-selection } 

Once a workflow, period, and organisation unit have been selected, a "Clear selections" button will appear. This button can be used to quickly clear all three fields and start a fresh selection.

## Approving data { #approving-data } 

### Review dataset reports { #review-dataset-reports } 

Once a workflow, period, and organisation unit have been selected, you can review the dataset reports for the datasets connected to the selected workflow. The data for each dataset is presented in a tab.

Datasets can have different period types than the workflow the are connected to. If this is the case, the approval app will show data for all the dataset-periods that end within the selected workflow period.

![Review dataset reports](resources/images/review_data.png)

### Take an approval action { #take-an-approval-action } 

Once you have reviewed the data in the datasets, you can proceed to take an approval action. The following actions are available:

-   Approve
-   Accept
-   Unapprove
-   Unaccept

Which of these actions are available for a given workflow at a given moment in time depends on the type of actions which have been taken already at the current and other levels of the organisational hierarchy.

In the example above the "approve" action is available. When you choose the "Approve" action, you are presented with a confirmation dialog as displayed below which summarises the datasets you are approving. The workflow is not approved until you click "Approve" to confirm there. Other actions take effect immediately and do not have a confirmation step.

![Take an approval action](resources/images/approval_confirmation.png)

After taking one of the approval actions, in this case after confirming the approval, the workflow is updated immediately and you see a the new approval status.

![Updated approval status](resources/images/approval_saved.png)

### Approval status tags { #approval-status-tags } 

As shown in the image above, the approval status is displayed in two places:

1. Above the dataset tabs, after the workflow information
1. Before the buttons on the bottom bar

These status tags may not always display the same information, because the have a slightly different meaning:

1. The status tag above the dataset represents the approval status of the workflow for the selected period and selected organisation unit
2. The status tag in the bottom bar does the same, but also takes your user profile.

A workflow may be ready to be approved at a given organisation unit level, but you do not have the appropriate authority to do so.



# Gerir painéis { #dashboard }

## About the Dashboards app { #about-the-dashboards-app } 

O aplicativo Dashboards torna possível apresentar uma visão geral de alto nível de seus dados, incluindo a exibição de objetos analíticos como mapas, gráficos, relatórios e tabelas, bem como a exibição de informações baseadas em texto, links de recursos e widgets de aplicativos.

Os recursos do aplicativo Dashboards incluem:

-   Visualizar e imprimir painéis
-   Criar e editar painéis
-   Partilhar painéis com utilizadores e grupos de utilizadores
-   Aplicar filtros temporários ao visualizar os painéis
-   Visualização responsiva em dispositivos móveis e telas pequenas
-   Acesse os painéis enquanto estiver off-line

## Layout do aplicativo de painéis { #dashboards_setup }

Os painéis têm um título, uma descrição e qualquer número de itens do painel. Acima do painel está a barra de painéis, que mostra todos os painéis disponíveis, um campo de pesquisa do painel e um botão ** + ** para criar um novo painel.

The Dashboards app has two modes: _view_ and _edit/create_. When you first log in
to DHIS2, your most recently used dashboard will be displayed in view mode, if you are on the same computer as you were previously. If you are using a different computer or browser, then the first starred dashboard will be displayed. If there are no starred dashboards, then the first dashboard (alphabetically) will be displayed. Starred dashboards always show first in the dashboard list.

Abaixo está um exemplo de um painel denominado "Antenatal Care", que foi preenchido com gráficos e mapas:

![](resources/images/dashboard-view-mode.png)

### Personalization { #personalization } 

O aplicativo Dashboards pode ser personalizado das seguintes maneiras:

-   [Defina a altura da barra de painéis](#dashboards_personalize_bar)
-   [Painéis com estrela para acesso rápido aos seus painéis favoritos](#dashboard-star-dashboard)
-   [Mostrar ou ocultar a descrição do painel](# dashboard-show-description)

### Responsive view on small screens { #responsive-view-on-small-screens } 

Ao visualizar painéis em telas pequenas (por exemplo, orientação retrato em um telefone celular), o painel se adapta à tela e mostra todos os itens em uma única coluna. Algumas opções, incluindo edição, filtro e partilha, não estarão disponíveis.

![](resources/images/dashboard-small-screen.png)

### Searching for a dashboard { #searching-for-a-dashboard } 

Pode pesquisar um painel específico usando o campo de pesquisa no canto superior esquerdo da barra de painéis intitulado “Pesquisar um painel”. A pesquisa não diferencia maiúsculas de minúsculas e, conforme digita, a lista de painéis é reduzida para aqueles que correspondem ao texto da pesquisa.

![](resources/images/dashboard-search-for-dashboard.png)

### Personalização da altura da barra do painel { #dashboards_personalize_bar }

You can set a specific height for the dashboards bar by
down-clicking and dragging the bottom edge of the bar. When you finish dragging, the new height will be set. Clicking on the down arrow at the bottom of the dashboards bar will expand the bar to its maximum height (10 "rows"). Clicking on the up arrow will reset the height to your personalized height.

## Creating and editing a dashboard { #creating-and-editing-a-dashboard } 

Para criar um novo painel, clique no botão **+** no canto esquerdo da barra do painel para entrar no modo de criação/edição:

![](resources/images/dashboard-new-button.png)

Para editar um painel existente, clique no botão **Editar** ao lado do título do painel (deve ter acesso de edição para ver este botão):

![](resources/images/dashboard-title-bar.png)

No modo de criação/edição, pode adicionar ou alterar o título do painel, a descrição e os itens do painel. Se não adicionar um título, o painel será automaticamente intitulado "Painel sem título".

![](resources/images/dashboard-create-mode.png)

### Adicionando itens ao painel { #adding-items-to-the-dashboard } 

Adicione itens ao painel procurando por itens usando o seletor suspenso **Pesquisar itens para adicionar a este painel**. Os tipos de item são:

-   Visualizações (gráficos e tabelas)
-   Mapas
-   Relatórios de eventos
-   Gráficos de eventos
-   Relatórios
-   Recursos
-   Apps
-   Mensagens
-   Caixas de texto
-   Espaçadores

![](resources/images/dashboard-item-selector.png)

A lista de itens na lista suspensa exibe inicialmente 10 visualizações (gráficos e tabelas) e 5 de cada uma das outras categorias, com base no texto de pesquisa inserido. Mensagens (e-mail), caixas de texto e itens espaçadores também são encontrados na lista. Para ver mais itens, clique em **Mostrar mais**, e a lista desse tipo será estendida para 25 itens. Se ainda não encontrar o item que deseja, tente digitar um texto de pesquisa mais específico.

#### Dashboard layout and placement of new items { #dashboard-layout-and-placement-of-new-items } 

Ao adicionar itens ao painel, pode escolher um layout geral clicando no botão **Alterar layout**. Pode alterar essa configuração de layout a qualquer momento.

-   Com o layout _Freeflow_, os itens adicionados podem ser movidos usando o mouse clicando no item e arrastando-o para a posição desejada. Os itens também podem ser redimensionados com o mouse clicando na alça de arrastar no canto inferior direito do item e arrastando para o tamanho desejado.
-   Com o layout _Colunas fixas_, pode escolher o número de colunas que deseja ter no painel, e o painel será criado automaticamente. Os itens não podem ser movidos ou redimensionados no layout _Colunas fixas_.

![](resources/images/dashboard-layout-modal.png)

Também pode configurar se os itens recém-adicionados são colocados automaticamente no início ou no final do painel, escolhendo a opção desejada. Esta opção pode ser alterada a qualquer momento.

![](resources/images/dashboard-place-items.png)

#### Itens espaçadores { #spacer-items } 

Ao adicionar itens ao painel usando o layout _Freeflow_, eles irão "subir" até esbarrar em outro item. Para forçar o espaço vertical vazio entre os itens (como uma linha vazia), pode adicionar itens espaçadores ao painel. Eles são visíveis apenas no modo de edição/criação. No modo de visualização, eles não são exibidos, mas ocupam o espaço definido.

Espaçador em **modo de edição/criação**:

![](resources/images/dashboard-spacer-edit-mode.png)

Espaçador em **modo de visualização**:

![](resources/images/dashboard-spacer-view-mode.png)

#### Removendo itens { #removing-items } 

Remova itens clicando na lata de lixo vermelha no canto superior direito do item. Esteja ciente de que quando remove um item no layout _Freeflow_, os itens que estão posicionados abaixo do item removido irão "subir" para cima até que colidam com um item acima.

### Actions in create/edit mode { #actions-in-createedit-mode } 

No modo de criação/edição, verá os seguintes botões na barra de ações na parte superior da página: **Salvar alterações**, **Visualizar impressão**, **Configurações de filtro**, **Traduzir**, **Apagar** e **Sair sem salvar**. Os botões **Traduzir** e **Apagar** são exibidos apenas se estiver editando um painel existente.

![](resources/images/dashboard-edit-mode-actions.png)

### Salvando o painel { #saving-the-dashboard } 

Ao criar ou editar um painel, as alterações são salvas quando clica no botão **Salvar alterações**. Se não quiser salvar suas alterações, clique no botão **Sair sem salvar**. Em seguida, retornará ao modo de visualização com o painel que estava visualizando anteriormente.

### Print preview { #print-preview } 

Clique no botão **Visualizar impressão ** para ver a aparência do painel ao ser impresso com a [Opção de layout do painel](#dashboard-print-layout).

![](resources/images/dashboard-edit-print-preview.png)

Clique em **Sair da visualização de impressão** para retornar à edição do painel.

Observe que alguns itens podem ser movidos para a próxima página para evitar a divisão entre duas páginas. Os itens também podem ser encurtados para caber em uma página. Os itens encurtados mostram um ícone de informações no canto superior direito do item na visualização. O ícone de informações não é visível na impressão real.

### Restringindo filtros do painel { #restricting-dashboard-filters }

Por padrão, os utilizadores serão capazes de filtrar itens do painel por qualquer dimensão definida na instância DHIS2. As configurações de filtro do painel podem ser editadas para um painel clicando em **Configurações de filtro**.

Para restringir os filtros disponíveis, pode clicar em **Permitir apenas a filtro por dimensões selecionadas** e selecionar os filtros que deseja permitir no painel. O período e a unidade organizacional são selecionados por padrão, mas podem ser removidos, se desejado. Quando o painel é visualizado, os utilizadores só poderão escolher entre os filtros selecionados.

![](resources/images/dashboard-filter-settings.png)

Para salvar as atualizações nas configurações do filtro, precisa primeiro clicar em **Confirmar** para fechar a caixa de diálogo Configurações do filtro e, em seguida, clicar em **Salvar alterações** para salvar as alterações do painel.

![](resources/images/dashboard-save-changes.png)

### Tradução do título e da descrição do painel { #translating-dashboard-title-and-description } 

Se estiver editando um painel existente, haverá um botão **Traduzir**. Clique neste botão para abrir a caixa de diálogo Tradução, que fornece uma lista de idiomas para os quais traduzir e mostra o título do painel original abaixo do campo de entrada de nome. Primeiro escolha o idioma para o qual deseja traduzir e, em seguida, preencha o nome do painel e a tradução da descrição.

![](resources/images/dashboard-translation-dialog.png)

### Excluindo um painel { #deleting-a-dashboard } 

Se tiver acesso para apagar o painel, haverá um botão **Apagar**. Ao clicar no botão **Apagar**, uma caixa de diálogo de confirmação será exibida primeiro para confirmar que deseja excluir o painel.

![](resources/images/dashboard-confirm-delete.png)

## Visualizando um painel { #viewing-a-dashboard } 

No modo de visualização, pode alternar entre mostrar a descrição, marcar um painel com estrela, aplicar filtros, imprimir o painel, disponibilizar o painel offline e partilhar o painel com outros utilizadores e grupos de utilizadores.

![](resources/images/dashboard-more-menu.png)

### Mostrar descrição { #dashboard-show-description }

Para alternar a descrição, abra o menu **... Mais** e escolha **Mostrar descrição** (ou **Ocultar descrição**). Essa configuração será lembrada para todos os painéis que abrir. Esta configuração se aplica si, não a outros utilizadores.

### Painéis favoritos{ #dashboard-star-dashboard }

Seus painéis com estrela são listados primeiro na lista de painéis para acesso rápido. Para marcar um painel com estrela, clique no botão de estrela à direita do título. Também pode alternar a estrela no menu **... Mais**. Quando a estrela está “preenchida”, isso significa que o painel está marcado com uma estrela. A estrela de um painel se aplica apenas a si, não a outros utilizadores.

### Filtrando um painel { #filtering-a-dashboard } 

Aplicar filtros a um painel altera os dados exibidos nos itens do painel que contêm visualizações. Os filtros são aplicados a cada item do painel da mesma maneira: cada filtro adicionado substitui o valor original para aquela dimensão no gráfico, tabela ou mapa original. É possível filtrar por unidades organizacionais e períodos, bem como por dimensões dinâmicas, dependendo da instância do DHIS2. Pode aplicar vários filtros ao painel.

Para adicionar um filtro, clique no botão **Adicionar filtro** e escolha uma dimensão:

![Adding a filter](resources/images/dashboard-filters.png)

Uma caixa de diálogo é aberta onde a seleção do filtro pode ser feita.

![Org Unit filter selection](resources/images/dashboard-orgunit-filter-dialog.png)

Click on **Confirm** in the dialog to apply the filter to the
current dashboard.

Os filtros não são armazenados, portanto, ao alternar para um painel diferente, eles são redefinidos. Os emblemas de filtro pretos aparecem acima dos itens do painel para indicar quais filtros foram aplicados às visualizações do painel.

![Current filters displayed as badges above the dashboard](resources/images/dashboard-filter-badges.png)

Pode editar um filtro clicando no ícone do filtro para abrir a caixa de diálogo de seleção de filtro. Um filtro pode ser removido clicando no botão **Remover** no emblema. Sempre que um filtro é adicionado, editado ou removido, os itens do painel são recarregados para mostrar os dados atualizados. Os emblemas do filtro estão sempre visíveis na parte superior da página ao rolar o conteúdo do painel.

Por padrão, os utilizadores podem filtrar itens do painel por qualquer dimensão definida na instância DHIS2. Para limitar os filtros disponíveis, consulte [Restringindo filtros do painel](#restting-dashboard-filters).

### Making dashboards available offline { #making-dashboards-available-offline } 

Para disponibilizar um painel offline, escolha a opção **Disponibilizar painel offline** no menu **... Mais**. Isso fará com que o painel de controle seja recarregado, onde as solicitações ao servidor são registradas e salvas no armazenamento do navegador. Observe que os painéis offline estão disponíveis apenas no computador e no navegador onde os definiu como offline. Se atualmente tem um filtro aplicado ao solicitar que o painel seja disponibilizado offline, uma caixa de diálogo aparecerá para confirmar a remoção dos filtros.

![](resources/images/dashboard-clear-filters-to-sync.png)

Os painéis que foram salvos para offline têm um indicador no chip do painel na barra de painéis, bem como uma tag que mostra a hora em que foi salvo.

![](resources/images/dashboard-offline-dashboard.png)

Se o painel foi alterado desde que o disponibilizou off-line, por si ou outra pessoa, precisará escolher **Sincronizar dados off-line agora** no menu **... Mais** para salvar a versão mais recente do painel.

![](resources/images/dashboard-sync-offline.png)

Pode remover um painel do armazenamento offline escolhendo **Remover do armazenamento offline** no menu **... Mais**.

![](resources/images/dashboard-remove-offline.png)

#### Other notes about Dashboards app when you are offline: { #other-notes-about-dashboards-app-when-you-are-offline } 

Se desconectar se manualmente da instância DHIS2, todos os painéis em cache serão limpos e não estarão mais disponíveis offline.

Se estiver offline, quaisquer botões ou ações que requeiram uma conexão para ser concluída com êxito serão desativados. Eles serão reativados assim que a conectividade for restaurada.

### Printing a dashboard { #printing-a-dashboard } 

No menu **... Mais**, pode imprimir o painel atual. Existem dois estilos de impressão do painel: _Layout do painel_ e _Um item por página_. Para ambos os estilos, é adicionada uma página de título que mostra o título do painel, a descrição (se a configuração _Mostrar descrição_ estiver ativada) e quaisquer filtros de painel aplicados.

![](resources/images/dashboard-print-menu.png)

Para melhores resultados de impressão:

-   usar Chrome ou Edge
-   espere até que todos os itens do painel sejam carregados antes de imprimir
-   usar configuração paisagem A4 com margens padrão definidas e gráficos de fundo ativados

#### Layout do painel de impressão { #dashboard-print-layout }

_Dashboard layout_ print aproximar-se-á do layout do painel conforme mostrado no navegador. Observe que alguns ajustes podem precisar ser feitos no layout para evitar que os itens sejam divididos em várias páginas: os itens que seriam cortados por uma quebra de página são movidos para a próxima página e os itens mais altos do que uma página são encurtados para caber em uma página.

Uma vez no modo de impressão, clique no botão **Imprimir** no canto superior direito para acionar a funcionalidade de impressão do navegador.

![](resources/images/dashboard-print-layout.png)

#### Print one item per page { #print-one-item-per-page } 

Este estilo de impressão imprimirá cada item do painel em uma página separada, maximizando o uso do tamanho do papel.

Clique no botão **Imprimir** no canto superior direito para acionar a funcionalidade de impressão do navegador.

![](resources/images/dashboard-print-oipp.png)

## Dashboard items with charts, pivot tables or maps { #dashboard-items-with-charts-pivot-tables-or-maps } 

Os itens do painel com gráficos, tabela dinâmica ou mapas podem ter um botão de menu de item no canto superior direito do item com opções de visualização adicionais, dependendo das configurações do sistema que foram definidas para a instância DHIS2. Se todas as configurações relevantes do sistema foram desabilitadas pela instância DHIS2, então não haverá um botão de menu de item. Aqui estão as opções de menu de itens possíveis:

### Alternando entre visualizações { #switching-between-visualizations } 

É possível alternar a visualização de visualização para itens que contêm gráficos, tabelas dinâmicas e mapas. Clique no botão do menu do item e escolha a visualização desejada (por exemplo, **Visualizar como tabela**, **Visualizar como mapa**, **Visualizar como gráfico**):

![](resources/images/dashboard-item-menu.png)

### View item in fullscreen { #view-item-in-fullscreen } 

Para visualizar o gráfico, tabela ou mapa em tela cheia, clique na opção ** Ver tela cheia **. Para sair da tela inteira, pode pressionar a tecla **esc** ou clicar no botão de saída no canto superior direito da visualização em tela inteira.

### Open in app { #open-in-app } 

Para abrir a visualização em seu aplicativo correspondente (por exemplo, Data Visualizer, Maps), clique na opção **Abrir no aplicativo [nome do aplicativo]**.

### Show interpretations and details { #show-interpretations-and-details } 

Pode escrever interpretações para o gráfico, tabela dinâmica, mapa, relatório de evento e itens do gráfico de evento clicando em **Mostrar interpretações e detalhes**:

![](resources/images/dashboard-item-menu-interpretations.png)

O item será expandido verticalmente por baixo para mostrar a descrição, interpretações e respostas. Pode gostar de uma interpretação, responder a uma interpretação e adicionar sua própria interpretação. Pode editar, partilhar ou excluir suas próprias interpretações e respostas e, se tiver acesso de moderador, pode excluir as interpretações de outras pessoas.

É possível formatar o campo de descrição e as interpretações com **negrito**, _itálico_ usando os marcadores de estilo Markdown \* e \_ para **negrito** e _itálico_ respectivamente. O campo de texto para escrever novas interpretações possui uma barra de ferramentas para adicionar rich text. Atalhos de teclado também estão disponíveis: Ctrl/Cmd + B e Ctrl/Cmd + I. Um conjunto limitado de smilies é compatível e pode ser usado digitando uma das seguintes combinações de caracteres: :) :-) :( :-(: +1: -1. Os URLs são detectados automaticamente e convertidos em um link clicável.

As interpretações são classificadas em ordem decrescente por data, com a mais recente exibida no topo. As respostas de interpretação são classificadas em ordem crescente por data, com a mais antiga exibida no topo.

![](resources/images/dashboard-interpretations.png)

## Partilhando um painel { #dashboard_sharing }

Para partilhar um painel com utilizadores e grupos de utilizadores, clique no botão **Partilhar** à direita do título do painel para exibir a caixa de diálogo _Partilha e acesso_.

![](resources/images/dashboard-sharing-dialog.png)

Existem três níveis de permissões de partilha disponíveis para um painel:

-   Sem acesso

    O utilizador ou grupo de utilizadores não pode visualizar ou editar o painel. Se eles tentarem acessar o painel com a url, o aplicativo Painéis exibirá a mensagem "Painel solicitado não encontrado".

-   Apenas ver

    O utilizador ou grupo de utilizadores pode visualizar o painel, mas não pode editá-lo.

-   Ver e editar

    O utilizador ou grupo de utilizadores pode visualizar e editar o painel. Este nível de partilha permite todos os tipos de mudanças, incluindo alterar o layout, redimensionar e remover itens, renomear e excluir o painel, etc.

Todos os painéis têm o grupo _Todos os utilizadores_ definido como **Sem acesso** por padrão. O grupo _Todos os utilizadores_ inclui todos os utilizadores conectados.

### Add users and user groups { #add-users-and-user-groups } 

Para partilhar um painel com utilizadores e grupos de utilizadores específicos, digite o nome no campo de entrada, escolha o nível de acesso desejado e clique em **Dar acesso**.

![](resources/images/dashboard-sharing-add-user.png)

Pode fornecer aos utilizadores a url do painel, permitindo que naveguem diretamente para o painel. Para obter o url do painel, basta abrir o painel no modo de visualização e copiar o url do navegador. Por exemplo, o url para o painel de Cuidados Pré-natais em play.dhis2.org/dev é:

https://play.dhis2.org/dev/dhis-web-dashboard/#/nghVC4wtyzi

### Cascade sharing of visualizations on the dashboard { #cascade-sharing-of-visualizations-on-the-dashboard } 

Para garantir que todos os gráficos, mapas e tabelas no painel sejam partilhados com os utilizadores e grupos de utilizadores escolhidos, clique no botão **Aplicar partilha aos itens do painel**.

![](resources/images/dashboard-sharing-cascade-sharing.png)



# Uso do aplicativo Data Visualizer { #data_visualizer }

![](resources/images/data-visualizer-overview.png)

## Criação e edição de visualizações { #creating-and-editing-visualizations } 

Ao abrir o aplicativo visualizador de dados a partir do menu dhis2, verá uma tela em branco e poderá começar a criar sua visualização imediatamente.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer-new.png)

### Selecione o tipo de visualização { #select-visualization-type } 

Select the desired visualization type from the selector in the upper left corner.
For each visualization type there is a brief description with suggestions about where to use the main dimensions in the layout.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer-visualization-type.png)

| Tipo de visualização      | Descrição                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| ----------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Coluna                  | Exibe informações como colunas retangulares verticais com comprimentos proporcionais aos valores que representam. <br> <br> Exemplo: comparar o desempenho de diferentes distritos. <br> <br> Restrições de layout: exatamente 1 dimensão como série, exatamente 1 dimensão como categoria.                                                                                                                                               |
| Coluna empilhada          | Exibe informações como colunas retangulares verticais, onde as barras que representam várias categorias são empilhadas umas sobre as outras. <br> <br> Exemplo: exibindo tendências ou somas de elementos de dados relacionados. <br> <br> Restrições de layout: o mesmo que Coluna.                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Barra                     | Igual a coluna, apenas com barras horizontais.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| Barra Empilhada             | Igual à coluna empilhada, apenas com barras horizontais.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| Linha                    | Exibe informações como uma série de pontos conectados por linhas retas. Também conhecido como série temporal. <br> <br> Exemplo: visualização de tendências nos dados do indicador em intervalos de tempo. <br> <br> Restrições de layout: o mesmo que Coluna.                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Área                    | É baseado em uma linha (acima), com o espaço entre o eixo e a linha preenchido com cores e as linhas empilhadas umas sobre as outras. <br> <br> Exemplo: comparar as tendências de indicadores relacionados. <br> <br> Restrições de layout: o mesmo que Coluna.                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Área empilhada            | O mesmo que Área, mas as áreas dos vários itens de dimensão são empilhadas umas sobre as outras. <br> <br> Exemplo: comparar as tendências de indicadores relacionados. <br> <br> Restrições de layout: o mesmo que Área.                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| Torta                     | Círculo dividido em setores (ou fatias). <br> <br> Exemplo: visualizar a proporção de dados para elementos de dados individuais em comparação com a soma total de todos os elementos de dados. <br> <br> Restrições de layout: exatamente 1 dimensão como série, não tem categoria.                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Radar                   | Exibe dados em eixos começando do mesmo ponto. Também conhecido como gráfico de aranha. <br> <br> Restrições de layout: o mesmo que Coluna.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Medidor                   | Semicírculo que exibe um único valor, normalmente de 100% (os valores inicial e final são configuráveis). <br> <br> Restrições de layout: exatamente 1 dimensão com exatamente 1 item como série, dimensão de dados é bloqueada para série.                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Ano após ano (linha)   | Útil quando deseja comparar um ano de dados com outros anos de dados. Com base em anos civis. <br> <br> Restrições de layout: a dimensão do período está desabilitada.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Ano após ano (coluna) | O mesmo que Ano após ano (linha), apenas com colunas.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Valor unico            | Displays a single value in a dashboard friendly way. If the dimension displayed has an indicator type assigned, a % symbol or a string (per thousand, per hundred thousand, etc...) is appended to the value.<br/>If an icon is assigned to the dimension in the Maintenance app, it can be shown on the side of the value, the icon can be toggled in the Options panel.<br><br>Layout restrictions: same as Gauge. |
| Tabela Dinâmica             | Resume os dados de uma tabela mais extensa e pode incluir somas, médias ou outras estatísticas, que a tabela dinâmica agrupa de maneira significativa. <br> <br> Restrições de layout: nenhum.                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Scatter                 | Os gráficos de dispersão permitem que os utilizadores registrem unidades organizacionais como pontos em relação a duas variáveis para um único período fixo ou relativo. <br> <br> Restrições de layout: exatamente 1 item cada como vertical e horizontal, a dimensão dos dados está bloqueada para vertical e horizontal, a unidade de organização está bloqueada para pontos.                                                                                                              |
| Outlier table           | Displays a list of outliers based on historical data.<br><br>Layout restrictions: organisation unit, period and data dimensions are locked to columns, no other dimensions can be added.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |

### Select dimensions { #select-dimensions } 

No menu de dimensões à esquerda, pode selecionar as dimensões que deseja mostrar em sua visualização, incluindo dados, período, unidades de organização e dimensões dinâmicas. Eles podem ser adicionados ao clicar em uma dimensão, arrastar e soltar uma dimensão na área de layout ou ao passar o cursor sobre uma dimensão e usando em seu menu de contexto (três pontos).

![](resources/images/data-visualizer-dimensions.png)

Assim como no menu de dimensões, na área de layout também pode alterar as seleções ao clicar em uma dimensão, arrastar e soltar uma dimensão ou ao usar o menu de contexto de uma dimensão (três pontos).

![](resources/images/data-visualizer-layout-area.png)

-   **Series**: A series is a set of continuous, related elements (for
    example periods or data elements) that you want to visualize in
    order to emphasize trends or relations in its data. Also known as Columns for Pivot table visualizations.

<!-- end list -->

-   **Categories**: A category is a set of elements (for example indicators
    or organisation units) for which you want to compare its data. Also known as Rows for Pivot table visualizations.

<!-- end list -->

-   **Filter**: The filter selection will filter the data displayed in the
    visualization. Note that if you use the data dimension as filter, you can
    only specify a single indicator or data set as filter item, whereas
    with other dimension types you can select any number of items.

### Selecione os itens de dimensão { #data_vis_select_dim_items }

Uma dimensão refere-se aos elementos que descrevem os valores dos dados no sistema. Existem três dimensões principais no sistema:

-   **Data**: Includes data elements, indicators and datasets (reporting
    rates), describing the phenomena or event of the data.

<!-- end list -->

-   **Períodos**: descreve quando o evento ocorreu.

<!-- end list -->

-   **Unidades de organização**: Descreve onde o evento ocorreu.

O Visualizador de dados é altamente flexível em termos de permitir que use essas dimensões como séries, categorias e filtro.

Para selecionar itens para uma dimensão, abra a janela modal da dimensão ao clicar em uma dimensão. Esta janela também será aberta automaticamente ao adicionar uma dimensão sem itens selecionados ao layout. Selecione quais itens adicionar à visualização ao clicar duas vezes em um item ou ao seleccionar um item com um único clique e usando as setas no meio. A ordem de apresentação será a mesma em que foram selecionados. Os itens selecionados podem ser reordenados arrastando-os e soltando-os na seção Selecionados.

#### Select data items { #select-data-items } 

Ao selecionar itens de dados, existem diferentes maneiras de filtrar os itens exibidos. Ao usar o campo de pesquisa na parte superior, uma pesquisa global por nome de item é realizada no **Tipo de dado** atualmente selecionado. Ao selecionar um **Tipo de dado** no menu suspenso, os itens podem ser filtrados por tipo e subtipo, onde o subtipo disponível depende do tipo de dados selecionado. A pesquisa de nome e a filtragem de tipo/subtipo também podem ser combinadas para um filtro mais detalhado. O tipo de cada item exibido é indicado por um ícone correspondente no item. Ao passar o mouse sobre um item, o nome do tipo também pode ser visualizado.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer-cc-data-modal.png)

#### Using custom calculations { #data-visualizer-custom-calculations }

A new personal indicator, also known as a custom calculation, can be created by clicking the **+ Calculation** button at the bottom-left of the Data modal. This will open the Calculation modal.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer-cc-data-type.jpg)

Previously created custom calculations can be found in the list of dimensions in the Data modal, either by scrolling, searching or using the **Data Type** filter **Calculations**. To edit a custom calculation, click the edit button (indicated by a pen icon) on the item itself.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer-cc-calculation-modal.png)

The Calculation modal has similar data element filters as seen in the Data modal, where items can be found by either scrolling, searching or filtering by groups. To add a data element or a math operator to the formula field (seen on the right), either double-click the item or drag it to the formula field.

Items in the forumula field can be rearranged by drag-and-drop and removed by either double-click or by selecting an item and clicking the **Remove item** button.

All calculations require a name before saving.

The formula will be validated on save. Note that only valid formulas can be saved. The formula can also be validated on request by clicking the **Check formula** button.

#### Select periods { #select-periods } 

Ao selecionar um período, tem a opção de escolher entre períodos fixos e períodos relativos. Eles também podem ser combinados. Os períodos sobrepostos são filtrados para que apareçam apenas uma vez. Para períodos relativos, os nomes são relativos à data atual, por exemplo, se o mês atual for março e **Último mês** for selecionado, o mês de fevereiro será mostrado na visualização.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer-period-dimension-modal.png)

#### Selecione as unidades de organização { #select-organisation-units } 

O diálogo das unidades de organização é flexível, ao oferecer essencialmente três maneiras de selecionar unidades de organização:

-   Seleção explícita: Use a **árvore** para selecionar explicitamente as unidades de organização que deseja que apareçam na visualização. Se clicar com o botão direito do mouse em uma unidade organizacional, poderá facilmente escolher selecionar todas as unidades organizacionais abaixo dela.

-   Níveis e grupos: os menus suspensos **Nível** e **Grupo** são uma maneira conveniente de selecionar todas as unidades em um ou mais grupos de unidades organizacionais ou em níveis específicos. Exemplo: selecione _Chiefdom_ (nível 3) para obter todas as unidades organizacionais nesse nível.

    Observe que, assim que pelo menos um nível ou grupo for selecionado, a árvore da unidade organizacional agora atua como o limite para os níveis/grupos. Exemplo: se selecionar _Chiefdom_ (nível 3) e unidade organizacional _Kailahun_ (no nível 2) na árvore, obterá todas as unidades dentro do distrito Kailahun.

-   As unidades de organização do utilizador:

    -   Unidade organizacional do utilizador: esta é uma forma de selecionar dinamicamente as unidades organizacionais às quais o utilizador conectado está associado.

    -   Sub-unidades do utilizador: Seleciona as sub-unidades da unidade de organização do utilizador.

    -   Unidades sub-x2 do utilizador: Seleciona as unidades dois níveis abaixo da unidade de organização do utilizador.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer-organisation-unit-dimension-modal.png)

#### Select dynamic dimensions { #select-dynamic-dimensions } 

When selecting a dynamic dimension, either individual or all items can be selected. By default, the **Manually select items** option is selected, which allows for individual items to be picked out of a list, similar to how the **Data** and **Period** dimensions are selected above.
To automatically select all items for a dimension, the **Automatically include all items** option can be selected. This will also include any additional items that are added in the future if the available dimension items are updated.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer-dynamic-dimension-modal.png)

### Two category charts { #two-category-charts } 

Most chart visualization types can show two categories.
Switching from Pivot Table to Column, Bar, Area (and their stacked versions) and Line is keeping the first two dimensions in Category, any additional dimension is moved to Filter.
The labels for the first dimension in Category are shown at the top of the chart, and the ones for the second dimension at the bottom.
The resulting visualization is composed of separate charts, one for each item in the first dimension.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer-two-category.png)

## Change the display of your visualization { #change-the-display-of-your-visualization } 

A exibição de uma visualização pode ser alterada ao ativar/desativar e ao configurar várias opções. Cada tipo de visualização pode ter um conjunto diferente de opções disponíveis. As opções são organizadas em guias na **caixa de diálogo Opções** e em seções dentro de cada guia.

1.  Clique em **Opções** para abrir a **caixa de diálogo Opções**.

2.  Navegue pelas abas na caixa de diálogo para ver as opções disponíveis.

3.  Configure as opções desejadas conforme necessário.

4.  Clique em **Atualizar** para aplicar as alterações à visualização.

### List of available options { #list-of-available-options } 

| Opção                              | Descrição                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| ----------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
|                                     | **Aba Dados**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Tipo de agregação                    | Define como os elementos de dados ou indicadores serão agregados na visualização. Alguns dos tipos de agregação são Por elemento de dados, Contagem, Mínimo e Máx.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Linha de base                           | Exibe uma linha horizontal no valor de domínio fornecido. Útil, por exemplo, quando deseja visualizar como seu desempenho evoluiu desde o início de um processo.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Subtotais da coluna                   | Exibe subtotais em uma tabela dinâmica para cada dimensão. <br> Se selecionar apenas uma dimensão, os subtotais serão ocultados para essas colunas. Isso ocorre porque os valores serão iguais aos subtotais.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Totais da coluna                       | Exibe os valores totais em uma tabela dinâmica para cada coluna, bem como um total de todos os valores na tabela.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| Valores cumulativos                   | Displays cumulative values in Column, Stacked column, Bar, Stacked bar, Line, Area and Pivot Table visualizations                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| Ordem de classificação personalizada                   | Controla a ordem de classificação dos valores.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Rótulos de dimensão                    | Mostra os nomes das dimensões como parte de uma tabela dinâmica.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| Esconder categorias vazias               | Oculta os itens da categoria sem dados da visualização. <br> **Antes do primeiro**: oculta os valores ausentes apenas antes do primeiro valor <br> **Depois do último**: oculta os valores ausentes apenas após o último valor <br> **Antes do primeiro e depois do último**: oculta os valores ausentes apenas antes do primeiro valor e após o último valor <br> **Todos**: oculta todos os valores ausentes <br> Isso é útil, por exemplo, quando cria visualizações de coluna e barra.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Esconder colunas vazias                  | Oculta colunas vazias de uma tabela dinâmica. Isso é útil quando olha para tabelas grandes onde uma grande parte dos itens de dimensão não tem dados para manter a tabela mais legível.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| Esconder as linhas vazias                     | Oculta linhas vazias de uma tabela dinâmica. Isso é útil quando olha para tabelas grandes onde uma grande parte dos itens de dimensão não tem dados para manter a tabela mais legível.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Max results                         | Sets the maximum number of rows to display in a Outlier table. The allowed range is 1 to 500.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Tipo de número                         | Define o tipo de valor que deseja exibir em uma tabela dinâmica: Valor, Percentagem de linha ou Percentagem de coluna. <br> As opções Percentagem da linha e Percentagem da coluna significam que exibirá os valores como percentagens do total da linha ou porcentagem do total da coluna em vez do valor agregado. Isso é útil quando você deseja ver a contribuição dos elementos de dados, categorias ou unidades de organização para o valor total.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Incluir apenas eventos concluídos       | Inclui apenas eventos concluídos no processo de agregação. Isso é útil, por exemplo, para excluir eventos parciais nos cálculos do indicador.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Subtotais de linha                      | Exibe subtotais em uma tabela dinâmica para cada dimensão. <br> Se selecionar apenas uma dimensão, os subtotais serão ocultados para essas linhas. Isso ocorre porque os valores serão iguais aos subtotais.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| Totais de linha                          | Exibe os valores totais em uma tabela dinâmica para cada linha, bem como um total de todos os valores na tabela.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Pular arredondamento                       | Ignora o arredondamento dos valores dos dados, oferecendo a precisão total dos valores dos dados. Pode ser útil para dados financeiros em que o valor total em dólares é necessário.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| Valores empilhados somam 100%       | Exibe valores 100% empilhados em colunas empilhadas e visualizações de barra empilhadas.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Linha alvo                         | Exibe uma linha horizontal no valor de domínio fornecido. Útil, por exemplo, quando deseja comparar seu desempenho com a meta atual.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Linha de tendência                          | Exibe a linha de tendência que visualiza como seus dados evoluem ao longo do tempo. Por exemplo, se o desempenho está a melhorar ou a piorar. Útil quando os períodos são selecionados como categoria.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Rótulos de valor                        | Mostra os valores acima da série na visualização.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
|                                     | **Axes tab**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Alcance do eixo                          | Define o valor máximo e mínimo que será visível no eixo do intervalo.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Título do eixo                          | Digite um título aqui para exibir um rótulo próximo ao eixo x ou y. Útil quando deseja fornecer informações de contexto para a visualização, por exemplo, sobre a unidade de medida. <br> `Gerado automaticamente a partir de itens do eixo` fornece um título baseado no conteúdo do eixo. <br> Nenhum remove o título. <br> `Personalizado` permite que digite um título personalizado.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Decimais                            | Define o número de decimais que serão usados para os valores do eixo do intervalo.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| Passos                               | Define o número de tiques que ficarão visíveis no eixo do intervalo.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
|                                     | **Guia Legenda**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| Use a legenda para as cores do gráfico         | Aplica uma legenda aos itens de visualização, que é uma cor baseada em valor para cada item. As próprias legendas são configuradas no `app de manutenção`.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Tipo de legenda                         | Controla qual legenda é aplicada. <br> `Usar legenda predefinida por item de dados` aplica uma legenda a cada elemento de dados ou indicador individualmente, com base na legenda atribuída a cada um no` aplicativo de manutenção`. <br> `Selecionar uma única legenda para visualização inteira` aplica uma única legenda a todos os itens de dados, escolhidos em uma lista suspensa de legendas disponíveis.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Estilo lenda                        | Controla onde a cor da legenda é aplicada, seja ao texto ou ao fundo. Pode usar esta opção para scorecards para identificar valores altos e baixos rapidamente. Não aplicável para visualizações de `Valor Único`,` Coluna` ou `Barra`.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| Mostrar chave da legenda                     | Exibe uma chave para a legenda no lado direito da visualização, para indicar os intervalos de valores e suas respectivas cores. Se a visualização for adicionada a um painel, essa opção também pode ser alternada no canto superior direito do item do painel.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|                                     | **Aba Série**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
|                                     | As opções para adicionar mais eixos e alterar a forma como as diferentes séries são exibidas são definidas nesta guia. Por favor, veja uma descrição detalhada de como isso funciona nas seções correspondentes abaixo.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
|                                     | **Aba de estilo**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Separador de grupo de dígitos               | Controla qual caractere usar para separar grupos de dígitos ou "milhares". Pode definir como Vírgula, Espaço ou Nenhum.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Show data item icon                 | Toggles the icon visibility in the Single Value visualization.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| Densidade de exibição                     | Controla o tamanho das células em uma tabela dinâmica. Pode definir como Confortável, Normal ou Compacto. <br> Compact é útil quando deseja ajustar tabelas grandes na tela do navegador.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Exibir hierarquia da unidade organizacional | Mostra o de todos os ancestrais das unidades de organização, por exemplo "Serra Leoa / Bombali / Tamabaka / Sanya CHP" para "Sanya CHP". <br> As unidades organizacionais são então classificadas em ordem alfabética, o que ordenará as unidades organizacionais de acordo com a hierarquia. <br> Quando descarrega de uma tabela dinâmica com unidades de organização como linhas e seleciona Exibir hierarquia de unidade de organização, cada nível de unidade de organização é renderizado como uma coluna separada. Isso é útil, por exemplo, quando cria tabelas dinâmicas do Excel em um computador local.                                                                                                                               |
| Fix column headers to top of table  | Freezes row headers in Pivot Tables so they are always visible when scrolling the table content.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Fix row headers to left of table    | Freezes column headers in Pivot Tables so they are always visible when scrolling the table content.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| Tamanho da fonte                           | Controla o tamanho de uma fonte de texto da tabela dinâmica. Pode definir como Grande, Normal ou Pequeno.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| Título do gráfico/tabela                   | Controla o título que aparece acima da visualização. <br> `Gerado automaticamente` usa o título padrão gerado a partir das dimensões / filtros da visualização. <br> Nenhum remove o título. <br> `Personalizado` permite que digite um título personalizado.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Subtítulo do gráfico/tabela                | Controla a legenda que aparece acima da visualização. <br> `Gerado automaticamente` usa a legenda padrão gerada a partir das dimensões/filtros da visualização. <br> Nenhum remove a legenda. <br> `Personalizado` permite que digite uma legenda personalizada.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Mostrar chave da legenda                     | Ativa e desativa a legenda, deixando mais espaço para a própria visualização.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Sem espaço entre barras/colunas       | Remove o espaço entre as colunas ou barras na visualização. Útil para exibir a visualização como uma curva EPI.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Rótulos de valor                        | Mostra os valores acima da série na visualização.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| Conjunto de cores                           | Controla as cores usadas no gráfico. Uma lista de conjuntos de cores disponíveis é exibida com uma prévia das cores. Também existe a opção "Padrões monocromáticos" que usa padrões coloridos em vez de cores sólidas.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|                                     | **Guia de valores limite**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Limite de valores mínimo/máximo        | Permite que os dados sejam filtrados no lado do servidor. <br> Pode instruir o sistema a retornar apenas os registros onde o valor dos dados agregados é igual, maior que, maior ou igual, menor ou menor ou igual a certos valores. <br> Se ambas as partes do filtro forem usadas, é possível filtrar um intervalo de registros de dados.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
|                                     | **Guia Parâmetros**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Ordem de classificação personalizada                   | Controla a ordem de classificação dos valores.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Incluir cumulativo                  | Inclui uma coluna com valores cumulativos para uma tabela dinâmica.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Incluir regressão                  | Inclui uma coluna com valores de regressão para uma tabela dinâmica.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Unidade organizacional                   | Controla se deve pedir ao utilizadores para entrar em uma unidade organizacional ao criar um relatório padrão no aplicativo Relatórios.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Unidade de organização mãe            | Controla se deve pedir ao utilizador para entrar em uma unidade de organização pai ao criar um relatório padrão no aplicativo Relatórios.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Período de relatório                    | Controla se deve pedir ao utilizador para inserir um período de relatório ao criar um relatório padrão no aplicativo Relatórios.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Limite superior                           | Controla o número máximo de linhas a serem incluídas em uma tabela dinâmica.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
|                                     | **Aba Outliers**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Método de detecção de outlier            | A análise de outlier é um processo que envolve a identificação de observações anómalas em um conjunto de dados. No Visualizador de dados, os valores discrepantes são detectados primeiro ao normalizar os dados em uma linha de regressão linear e, em seguida, ao analisar a distância de cada ponto da linha de regressão. Atualmente, três métodos são suportados. **Intervalo interquartil (IQR)** é baseado na divisão de um conjunto de dados em quartis, enquanto **Pontuação z modificada** é baseada no Desvio Mediano Absoluto (MAD). IQR e MAD são considerados as duas medidas robustas de escala mais comuns. **O escore z padrão** é baseado no desvio padrão e, portanto, é considerado menos robusto, pois é muito influenciado por outliers. |
| Fator de limiar                    | O número pelo qual os limites outlier são multiplicados. Controla a sensibilidade da faixa de limite. Os fatores padrão são 1,5 para IQR e 3 para z-scores.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |

### Custom styling for text and series key in charts { #custom-styling-for-text-and-series-key-in-charts } 

The following options can be customized using the text styling tool: `Chart title`, `Chart subtitle`, `Show series key`, `Target line`, `Base line`, `Axis title` and `Labels` for both horizontal and vertical axes.
The text styling tool allows to choose a font size, color and italic/bold variants. It's also possible to choose the position of the text.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer-text-styling-tool.png)

## Adicionando categorias atribuídas { #adding-assigned-categories } 

Categorias atribuídas é uma dimensão composta que representa combinações de opções de categorias associadas à combinação de categorias do elemento de dados selecionado. Isso pode ser adicionado ao arrastar a dimensão **Categorias atribuídas** do menu de dimensões do lado esquerdo e para o layout de visualização:

![](resources/images/data-visualizer-assigned-categories.png)

Outra maneira de adicionar categorias atribuídas é aceder a opção **Adicionar categorias atribuída ** no menu de contexto da dimensão `Dados` (não disponível para` Medidor`, `Ano após ano` ou` Valor único`).

## Adicionando mais eixos { #adding-more-axes } 

Ao combinar dados com diferentes escalas de medição, obterá uma visualização mais significativa por ter mais de um eixo. Para `Coluna`,` Barra`, `Área` e` Linha` pode fazer isso ao clicar na guia ** Série ** na caixa de diálogo `Opções`. Se a opção estiver desabilitada, certifique-se de que a dimensão `Dados` está no eixo` Série` e que pelo menos dois itens foram adicionados.

Four axes are available, two on the left side (axis 1 and 3) of the chart and two on the right side (axis 2 and 4).
Each axis has a different color and the chart items are going to be colored accordingly.

> **Nota**
>
> Quando vários eixos estão em uso, a opção `Color set` na guia` Style` será desabilitada. As opções `Linha de destino` e` Linha de base` estão disponíveis na guia `Eixos` por eixo.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer-series-tab-multi-axis.png)

## Using multiple visualization types { #using-multiple-visualization-types } 

É possível combinar um gráfico `Coluna` com itens` Linha` e vice-versa. Isso é feito ao clicar na guia ** Série ** na caixa de diálogo `Opções` e ao alterar o` Tipo de visualização`. Isso também pode ser combinado com o uso de vários eixos (conforme descrito na seção acima).

![](resources/images/data-visualizer-series-tab-multi-axis-multi-type.png)

Isso resulta em um gráfico que combina os tipos `Coluna` e` Linha`.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer-multi-type-chart.png)

## Data drilling { #data-drilling } 

Este recurso está habilitado para os tipos de visualização `Tabela dinâmica`,` Coluna`, `Coluna empilhada`,` Bar` e `Barra empilhada` e permite detalhar os dados ao clicar em uma célula / coluna / barra de valor na visualização . Um menu contextual é aberto com várias opções.

Pode pesquisar os dados por unidade organizacional, o que significa navegar para cima e para baixo na árvore da unidade organizacional. A análise de dados afeta a seleção de dimensão atual na área de layout. A dimensão da unidade de organização deve, portanto, estar presente no eixo Colunas / Série ou no eixo Linhas / Categoria para que o recurso de perfuração seja ativado.

![Data drilling in a pivot table](resources/images/data-visualizer-pt-drill.png)

![Data drilling in a column chart](resources/images/data-visualizer-column-drill.png)

## Gerenciar visualizações salvas { #manage-saved-visualizations } 

Salvar suas visualizações torna mais fácil encontrá-las mais tarde. Também pode optar por partilhá-los com outros utilizadores ou exibi-los em um painel.

### Abra uma visualização { #open-a-visualization } 

1.  Clique em **Arquivo** \> **Abrir**.

2.  Digite o nome de uma visualização no campo de pesquisa ou clique nas setas ** <** and **> ** para navegar entre as diferentes páginas. O resultado também pode ser filtrado por tipo e proprietário ao usar os menus correspondentes no canto superior direito.

3.  Clique no nome do que deseja abrir.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer-open-dialog.png)

### Salvar uma visualização { #save-a-visualization } 

1. a) Clique em **Arquivo** \> **Salvar**.

2. Insira um **Nome** e uma **Descrição** para sua visualização.

3. Clique em **Salvar**.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer-save-dialog.png)

### Renomear uma visualização { #rename-a-visualization } 

1.  Clique em **Arquivo** \> **Renomear**.

2.  Insira o novo nome e/ou descrição.

3.  Clique em **Renomear**.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer-rename-dialog.png)

### Excluir uma visualização { #delete-a-visualization } 

1.  Clique em **Arquivo** \> **Excluir**.

2.  Clique em **Excluir**.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer-delete-dialog.png)

### Obtenha o link para a visualização { #get-the-link-to-the-visualization } 

1. Clique em **Arquivo** \> **Obter link**.

2. O URL pode ser copiado por meio do menu de contexto do navegador que abre ao clicar com o botão direito do mouse no link.

## Interpretações de visualização { #visualization-interpretations } 

Ao verificar uma visualização salva, pode expandir as interpretações no lado direito, ao clicar no botão Interpretações no canto superior direito. A descrição da visualização também será mostrada. A descrição é compatível com o formato rich text.

Novas interpretações podem ser adicionadas ao digitar no campo de texto no canto inferior direito. Outros utilizadores podem ser mencionados com `@ username`. Comece por digitar `@` mais as primeiras letras do nome de utilizador ou nome real e uma lista de utilizadores correspondentes será exibida. Os utilizadores mencionados receberão uma mensagem DHIS2 interna com a interpretação ou comentário. As interpretações também podem ser vistas no aplicativo **Dashboard**.

É possível formatar o texto com **negrito**, _itálico_ ao usar os marcadores de estilo Markdown `*` e `_` para **negrito** e _itálico_ respectivamente (atalhos de teclado também estão disponíveis:` Ctrl` / `Cmd `+` B` e `Ctrl` /` Cmd` + `I`). Um conjunto limitado de emojis é suportado e pode ser usado ao digitar uma das seguintes combinações de caracteres: `:)` `:-)` `: (` `:-(` `: + 1``: -1`. URLs são detectados automaticamente e convertidos em um link clicável.

Para visualizar a visualização de acordo com a data de uma determinada interpretação, clique na interpretação ou no botão `Visualizar`. Isso irá regenerar a visualização com a data relevante, que é indicada ao lado do título da visualização. Clicar em `Voltar para todas as interpretações` irá regenerar a visualização com a data atual.

Para assinar a visualização salva, clique no ícone de sino no canto superior direito. Receberá mensagens internas sempre que outro utilizador gostar/criar/atualizar uma interpretação nesta visualização salva.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer-view-interpretation.png)

## Compartilhe uma visualização { #share-a-visualization } 

As configurações de partilha podem ser acedidos ao clicar em **Arquivo** \> **Partilhar**. Altere as configurações de partilha para os grupos de utilizadores que deseja modificar, as configurações disponíveis são:

-   **Pode editar e visualizar**: Pode visualizar e editar a visualização.

-   **Pode visualizar apenas**: só pode visualizar a visualização.

-   **Sem acesso**: Não terá acesso à visualização. Esta configuração é aplicável apenas para **Acesso público** e **Acesso externo**. (Observe que para permitir o acesso a todos, **Acesso público** e **Acesso externo** devem ser definidos para permitir a visualização.)

Novos utilizadores podem ser adicionados procurando-os pelo nome em `Adicionar utilizadores e grupos de utilizadores`.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer-share-dialog.png)

## Download { #download } 

As visualizações podem ser baixadas ao usar o menu **Descarregar**. Todos os tipos de visualização suportam descarregar `Graphics` e` Plain data source`, exceto o tipo `Pivot table`, que pode ser baixado como` Table layout` e `Plain data source`.

### Download de `gráficos` { #graphics-download } 

Descarregar um arquivo de imagem (.png) ou PDF (.pdf) para o seu computador.

### Download do `Layout da tabela` { #table-layout-download } 

Descarregar um arquivo Excel (.xls), CSV (.csv) ou HTML (.html) para o seu computador.

### Download de `fonte de dados simples` { #plain-data-source-download } 

You can download the data source of a visualization in JSON, XML, Excel,
CSV, JXRML or Raw data SQL formats with different identification schemes
(ID, Code, and Name). The data document uses identifiers of the
dimension items and opens in a new browser window to display the URL of
the request to the Web API in the address bar. This is useful for
developers of apps and other client modules based on the DHIS2 Web API
or for those who require a plan data source, for instance for import
into statistical packages.

**Formatos disponíveis**

| Formato              | Açao                        | Descrição                                                                                                                                                    |
| ------------------- | ----------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| JSON                | Clique em JSON                    | Baixa o formato JSON com base na propriedade ID, Código ou Nome.                                                                                                  |
| XML                 | Clique em XML                     | Descarregar no formato XML com base na propriedade ID, Código ou Nome.                                                                                                   |
| Microsoft Excel     | Clique em Microsoft Excel         | Descarregar no formato Microsoft Excel com base na propriedade ID, Código ou Nome.                                                                                       |
| CSV                 | Clique em CSV                     | Descarregar no formato CSV com base na propriedade ID, Código ou Nome.                                                                                                   |
| Conjunto de valores de dados XML  | Clique em Avançado> XML          | Faz o download dos valores de dados brutos como XML, em oposição aos dados que foram agregados ao longo de várias dimensões.                                                   |
| Conjunto de valores de dados JSON | Clique em Avançado> JSON         | Descarregar valores de dados brutos como JSON, ao contrário dos dados que foram agregados ao longo de várias dimensões.                                                  |
| JRXML               | Clique em Avançado> JRXML        | Produz um modelo de Relatório Jasper que pode ser ainda mais personalizado com base em suas necessidades exatas e usado como base para um relatório padrão no DHIS 2.        |
| SQL de dados brutos        | Clique em Avançado> SQL de dados brutos | Fornece a instrução SQL real usada para gerar a visualização de dados. Pode usá-lo como uma fonte de dados em um relatório Jasper ou como base para uma exibição SQL. |

## Veja a visualização como um mapa { #see-visualization-as-map } 

Para ver como uma visualização ficaria no mapa, selecione o tipo de visualização `Abrir como mapa` após terminar de construir sua visualização.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer-open-as-map.png)



# Using the Line Listing app { #using-the-line-listing-app } 

The Line Listing app is a new app that replaces the line listing functionality in the Event Reports app, but also offers additional functionality.

> **NOTE**
>
> There will be a forward compatibility with the Event Reports app, which means that you can open the existing event reports of type line list in the Line Listing app, but you cannot save changes to them in the Line Listing app.

### Creating and editing a line list { #creating-and-editing-a-line-list } 

When you open the Line Listing app from the DHIS2 menu, you are presented with a blank slate, and you can start creating a line list.

![](resources/images/image5.png)

## Creating a line list { #creating-a-line-list } 

### Line list { #line-list } 

In the Line Listing app, you currently only have one type of selection which is Line list.

![](resources/images/image24.png)

### Input { #input } 

(_This is the same as you see in the Event Reports app_). When you open the Input tab you will see below two options:

-   Event (see individual event data from an event program or a tracker program stage)
-   Enrollment (see data from multiple stages in a tracker program)

![](resources/images/image7.png)

### Program Dimensions { #program-dimensions } 

(In the Event Reports app these are called data dimensions.)

The line list will always be based on event or tracker programs and you can do analysis on a range of dimensions. For programs with category combinations, you can use program categories and category option group sets as dimensions.

> **Tip**
>
> In the Line Listing app, all the dimensions related to a tracker or an event program are present in the program dimension component.

-   Choose a program

    Select program: All the event and tracker programs will be visible in the drop down.

    If you have selected the Event, then for tracker programs you need to select the program stage to get all the data elements, attributes for that particular stage. To be able to select data from multiple stages you need to select "Enrollment" as the input type.

If you select an event program you don’t have to select the stage (unlike the Event Reports app).

![](resources/images/image9.png)

If you select Enrollment in the Input tab then all data elements associated with the program will be available from different stages within the program for the purpose of cross stage selection of data elements. Each data element will act as a dimension.

![](resources/images/image8.png)

If you want to filter the data, by data elements, program attribute, program indicators, category, category option group set you can do so by clicking on the dropdown option.

![](resources/images/image11.png)

There are multiple ways to add data elements to the layout. They can be added by hovering over the dimension and clicking the plus icon or by dragging and dropping a dimension straight to the layout area.

![](resources/images/image10.png)

Alternatively, you can click on the respective data element and then choose to add it in column or filter as shown in below figure.

![](resources/images/image6.png){ width=50% }

Each dimension can have criteria (filters). Data elements of the type option set allows for "in" criteria, where multiple options can be selected.

![](resources/images/image12.png)

Numeric values can be compared to filter values using greater than, equal or less than operators. (Optional) For each data element, specify a filter with operators such as "greater than", "in" or "equal" together with a filter value.

> **Note**
>
> The enhancement in this feature is that you can add multiple conditions and there are also different operators which can be used. You can also filter by empty or not empty.

![](resources/images/image13.png){ width=50% }

In the Line Listing app for BOOLEAN type data element, here in the analysis it will show “Yes”, ”No”, ”Not answered” instead of 0 and 1 as in the Event Reports app or the Data Visualizer app.

![](resources/images/image14.png)

![](resources/images/image16.png)

The line list will be displayed as a table with one row per event. Each dimension can be used as a column in the table or as a filter.

![](resources/images/image22.png)

### Your Dimension { #your-dimension } 

All **Organisation Unit group sets** are present under **Your dimension** component for further evaluation or analysis.

### Main and Program Dimensions { #main-and-program-dimensions } 

#### Select Organisation Unit { #select-organisation-unit } 

The organisation unit dialog is flexible, offering essentially three ways of selecting organisation units:

-   Seleção explícita: Use a **árvore** para selecionar explicitamente as unidades de organização que deseja que apareçam na visualização. Se clicar com o botão direito do mouse em uma unidade organizacional, poderá facilmente escolher selecionar todas as unidades organizacionais abaixo dela.
-   Levels and groups: The **Level** and **Group** dropdowns are a convenient way to select all units in one or more org unit groups or at specific levels. Example: select *CH Mahosot* (level 3) to get all org units at that level.

    > **NOTE**
    >
    > Please note that as soon as at least one level or group has been selected the org unit tree now acts as the boundary for the levels/groups. Example: if you select CH Mahosot (level 3) and Vientiane Capital org unit (at level 2) in the tree you get all units inside that district.\_

-   As unidades de organização do utilizador:
    -   User organisation unit: This is a way to dynamically select the org units that the logged in user is associated with.
    -   User sub-units: Selects the subunits of the user organisation unit.
    -   Unidades sub-x2 do utilizador: Seleciona as unidades dois níveis abaixo da unidade de organização do utilizador.

![](resources/images/image18.png)

#### Event Status { #event-status } 

Filters data based on the event status:  **Active**, **Completed**, **Scheduled**.

You can visualize the data for a particular event status

![](resources/images/image19.png)

#### Program Status { #program-status } 

Filters data based on the program status: **Active**, **Completed** or **Cancelled**.

![](resources/images/image20.png)

#### Created by / Last updated by { #created-by-last-updated-by } 

Will display the data based on who created the particular event.

### Time Dimensions { #time-dimensions } 

This is a new feature in Line Listing app where you will be able to view the data on the basis of different time dimensions.

-   Event date/Report Compilation date
-   Date patient notified in the health system.
-   Incident date
-   Last updated on
-   Scheduled date

You can click on the above time dimension to visualize data on different period dimension, a window will open where you can select one or several periods.

You have three period options: relative periods, fixed periods and start/end dates. You can combine fixed periods and relative periods in the same table You cannot combine fixed periods and relative periods with start/end dates in the same table Overlapping periods are filtered so that they only appear once.

-   Fixed periods: In the **Select period type** box, select a period type. You can select any number of fixed periods from any period type. Fixed periods can for example be "January 2021".
-   Relative periods: In the lower part of the **Periods** section, select as many relative periods as you like. The names are relative to the current date. This means that if the current month is March and you select **Last month**, the month of February is included in the visualization. Relative periods have the advantage that it keeps the data in the report up to date as time goes.
-   Start/end dates: Next to Choose form presets, select **Start/end dates**. This period type lets you specify flexible dates for the time span in the report.

![](resources/images/image21.png)

### Column Header { #column-header } 

You can sort on all column headers

You can filter the specific column by directly clicking the data elements or attributes at the column and you will be able to sort the data values

> **Example**
>
> In the below screenshot, we have selected AEFI – Headache.
>
> ![](resources/images/image22.png)
>
> Once we click on AEFI – Headache we will get a dialog box where we need to select the option we want to filter out. In this we have selected “Yes” only.
>
> ![](resources/images/image23.png){ width=50% }
>
> Once we click on update, we will get the line list with only “Yes” under AEFI – Headache.
>
> ![](resources/images/image1.png)

### Repeatable Events { #repeatable-events } 

This is a new feature in the Line Listing app.

If the program stage has a data element in a repeatable event you can click on the data element and the window will open up where you will be able to see the Repeated event tab

![](resources/images/image2.png){ width=50% }

Then, you can define the most recent events and the oldest events you want in the output as displayed below.

![](resources/images/image3.png){ width=50% }

Once you click on update you will be able to visualize the events of this repeatable program stage as shown below.

![](resources/images/image4.png)

### Applying legend colors { #applying-legend-colors } 

You can apply colors to a visualization by using the legend feature, which can be found under `Options` -> `Legend`

![](resources/images/legend-options.png)

| Opção                             | Descrição                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| ---------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Use a legend for table cell colors | Aplica uma legenda aos itens de visualização, que é uma cor baseada em valor para cada item. As próprias legendas são configuradas no `app de manutenção`.                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Estilo lenda                       | Controls where the color from the legend is applied, either to the text or the background. You can use this option for scorecards to identify high and low values at a glance.                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| Tipo de legenda                        | Controla qual legenda é aplicada. <br> `Usar legenda predefinida por item de dados` aplica uma legenda a cada elemento de dados ou indicador individualmente, com base na legenda atribuída a cada um no` aplicativo de manutenção`. <br> `Selecionar uma única legenda para visualização inteira` aplica uma única legenda a todos os itens de dados, escolhidos em uma lista suspensa de legendas disponíveis. |
| Mostrar chave da legenda                    | Displays a key for the legend on the right side of the visualization, to indicate the value ranges and their respective color.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |

Below is an example of a line list with legend colors applied to the background, per data item.

![](resources/images/legend-example.png)

### Showing the organisation unit hierarchy { #showing-the-organisation-unit-hierarchy } 

You can show the full hierarchy path for organisation units by enabling the **Show organisation unit hierarchy** option in `Options` -> `Style`. When this is enabled, sorting on the organisation unit column will sort the organisation units alphabetically starting from the top level.

![](resources/images/org-unit-hierarchy.png)

### Skip rounding for numeric values { #skip-rounding-for-numeric-values } 

You can control how numeric values are formatted by toggling the **Skip rounding** option in `Options` -> `Data`. When this is enabled, the numeric values are not rounded and all decimals are shown. By default rounding is applied.

Below is an example of the same table with and without the option applied.

![](resources/images/skip-rounding-example.png)
![](resources/images/no-skip-rounding-example.png)

### View options { #view-options } 

To allow more space for the line list itself, there are various ways to hide panels on the top and sides:

1. The "full screen button" in the title bar will hide the main sidebar on the left and the layout panel at the top of the screen.
2. If the interpretations panel is expanded on the right, this can be hidden by clicking the "interpretations button" just below the user profile menu.
3. Each panel can also be shown/hidden by using the "View menu" in the main toolbar.

![](resources/images/view-options.png)

To provide more space for the content in the "Accessory Side Panel" it can be resized using the mouse as illustrated below:

![](resources/images/resizable_accessory_sidebar.png)

Resizing can also be done using the left/right arrow key on the keyboard. These keyboard shortcuts become active after giving focus to the resize-handle (by repeatedly hitting the tab key):

![](resources/images/resizable_accessory_sidebar_keyboard.png)

The "Accessory Side Panel" can be reset to its default width, by using the "View" menu or double clicking the resize-handle.

![](resources/images/resizable_accessory_sidebar_reset.png)


# Usando o aplicativo Maps { #using_maps }

## Sobre o aplicativo Maps { #about_maps }

The Maps App was introduced in release 2.29 and serves as a replacement
of the GIS App offering a more intuitive and user-friendly interface.
The mapping engine from version 2.34 is based on WebGL technology,
capable of showing thousands of features on a map simultaneously.

With the Maps app you can overlay multiple layers and choose among
different basemaps. You can create thematic maps of areas and points,
view facilities based on classifications, and visualize catchment areas
for each facility. You can add labels to areas and points, and search
and filter using various criteria. You can move points and set locations
on the fly. Maps can be saved and shared with other users
and groups, or downloaded as an image.

> **Note**
>
> To use predefined legends in the **Maps** app, you need to create them
> first in the **Maintenance** app.

![](resources/images/maps_main.png)

-   The **layer panel** on the left side of the workspace shows an
    overview of the layers for the current map:

    -   As layers are added, using the **(+) Add layer** button, they
        are arranged and managed in this panel.

    -   The **basemap** card is always shown in the panel. The default available
        basemaps are OpenStreetMap Light (OSM Light) and OpenStreetMap Detailed (OSM Detailed). The default selected basemap is OSM Light, unless a different
        basemap has been configured in the system settings. OSM Detailed contains more map features and place names. If the Bing Maps API key has been added by a system administrator, then there will be an additional 4 basemaps from Bing Maps (Bing replaced Google Maps provided in previous versions). Bing Road and Bing Dark show roads, borders and places. Use the dark version if the colors on your map layers are bright. Bing Aerial and Bing Aerial Labels show satellite and detailed aerial imagery. Switch between them by selecting the desired image.

    -   The small arrow button to the right of the layer panel, at the
        top, allows the panel to be hidden or shown.

<!-- end list -->

-   The **File** button near the top left allows you to open and save
    maps. See [using the maps file menu](#using_maps_file_menu) for more detailed information.

<!-- end list -->

-   O botão **Descarregar** próximo ao botão Arquivo permite que baixe o mapa atual como uma imagem PNG.

<!-- end list -->

-   The **Interpretations** button at top right opens an interpretations
    panel on the right side of the workspace. See [viewing interpretations](#mapsInterpretation) for more information.

<!-- end list -->

-   The **+** and **-** buttons on the map allow you to zoom in and out
    of the map respectively. The mouse scroll wheel zoom is continuous,
    allowing us to fit the map perfectly to your content.

-   The **rotate map** button (triangle arrows) allows you to
    rotate and tilt the map to enhance the view of your data. Press and hold the button
    (or hold the Control key on your keyboard) while moving your mouse to change the
    map view. Click to button again to reset the view.

-   **Fullscreen** (four arrows) allows you to view the map in fullscreen.
    To exit fullscreen click the button again or the escape key on your keyboard.

-   **Zoom to content** (bounded magnifying glass symbol) automatically
    adjusts the zoom level and map center position to put the data on
    your map in focus.

-   **Search** (magnifying glass symbol) allows searching for and
    jumping to a location on the map.

-   O botão **régua** permite medir distâncias e áreas no mapa.

-   Right-click on the map to display the longitude and latitude of that
    location.

**Basemaps**

Basemap layers are represented by layer _cards_ in the layer panel such
as:

![](resources/images/maps_basemap_card.png)

Ao longo da parte superior da secção do mapa base, da esquerda para a direita:

-   O título do mapa base selecionado

-   Um símbolo de seta para recolher e expandir a secção do mapa base

In the middle of the basemap card is the list of available basemaps. The
current basemap is highlighted.

Ao longo da parte inferior da secção do mapa base está:

-   Um símbolo de olho para alternar a visibilidade da camada

-   Um controle deslizante para modificar a transparência da camada

## Crie um novo mapa { #using_maps_create_map }

1.  In the **Apps** menu of DHIS2, click **Maps**. The **DHIS2 Maps** app
    opens.

2.  Click the (+) Add layer button in the top left. You are presented
    with the layer selection dialog:

    ![](resources/images/maps_layer_selection.png)

3.  Selecione uma camada para adicionar ao mapa atual. As opções possíveis são:

    -   [Thematic](#using_maps_thematic_layer)

    -   [Events](#using_maps_event_layer)

    -   [Tracked entities](#using_maps_tracked_entity_layer)

    -   [Unidades sanitárias] (# using_maps_facility_layer)

    -   [Org units](#using_maps_org_unit_layer)

    In addition, several layers may be provided by [Google Earth
    Engine](#using_maps_gee) and [other external services](#using_maps_external_map_layers). Various Google Earth Engine layer sources are available
    if the Google Earth Engine API key has been set up (see [documentation](https://docs.dhis2.org/en/use/user-guides/dhis-core-version-master/configuring-the-system/system-settings.html#system_server_settings:~:text=com/analytics.-,Google%20Maps%20API%20key,-Defines%20the%20API)).

    > **Note**
    >
    > The [**Maps app administrator**](#maps_app_administrator) can:
    >
    > -   Select the sources for Google Earth Engine layers available to other users via the **Manage available layer sources** button.
    > -   Add external layer sources in the Maintenance app.

    Here is the list of default sources for a Google Earth Engine layer:

    -   População

    -   Population age groups

    -   Building footprints

    -   Elevação

    -   Precipitação

    -   Temperatura

    -   Cobertura da terra

    The single default source for an external layer is:

    -   Labels overlay

## Gerir camadas temáticas { #using_maps_thematic_layer }

_Thematic maps_ represent spatial variation of geographic distributions.
Select your desired combination of indicator/data element, period and
organisation unit level. If your database has coordinates and aggregated
data values for these organisation units, they will appear on the map.

> **Note**
>
> You must generate the DHIS2 analytics tables to have aggregated data
> values available.

![](resources/images/maps_thematic_mapping.png)

Thematic layers are represented by layer _cards_ in the layer panel such
as:

Ao longo da parte superior do cartão temático, da esquerda para a direita:

-   Um campo de captura para permitir arrastar e reordenar as camadas com o mouse

-   O título e o período associados à camada

-   Um símbolo de seta para recolher e expandir o cartão temático

In the middle of the thematic card is a legend indicating the value
ranges displayed on the layer.

Ao longo da parte inferior da secção temática, da esquerda para a direita:

-   Um botão de edição (lápis) para abrir a caixa de diálogo de configuração da camada

-   Um símbolo de olho para alternar a visibilidade da camada

-   Um controle deslizante para modificar a transparência da camada

-   Um botão de mais ações (três pontos) com opções adicionais:

    -   A **Show/hide data table** toggle button to show or hide the data table
        associated with the layer

    -   **Open as chart** will open this thematic data as a chart in the Data Visualizer app

    -   **Descarregar de dados** permite que baixe os dados para esta camada no formato GeoJSON para uso em outro software de mapeamento

    -   **Editar camada** é igual ao botão editar acima

    -   **Remover camada** irá remover esta camada do mapa atual.

### Crie uma camada temática { #create-a-thematic-layer } 

To create a thematic layer, choose **Thematic** on the **Add
layer** selection. This opens the Thematic layer configuration dialog.

1.  In the **Data** tab:

    ![](resources/images/maps_thematic_layer_dialog_DATA.png)

    -   Select a data type and then select respectively the group and
        the target element. The available fields depend on the type of
        item selected.

    -   Select a value from the **Aggregation type** field for the data
        values to be shown on the map. By default, "By data element" is
        selected. Alternative values are: Count; Average; Sum; Standard
        deviation; Variance; Min; Max. See also [Aggregation
        operators](https://dhis2.github.io/dhis2-docs/master/en/user/html/ch10s05.html#d0e8082).

    -   **Only show completed events**: Includes only completed events in the aggregation process.
        This is useful when you want to exclude partial events in indicator calculations. Available
        for indicators, program indictors and event data items.

2.  In the **Period** tab

    ![](resources/images/maps_thematic_layer_dialog_PERIOD.png)

    -   select the time span over which the thematic data is mapped.
        You can select either a relative or a fixed period.

        -   Período relativo

            In the **Period type** field select **Relative**, then
            select one of the relative periods, for example **Last year** or
            **Last 12 months**, in the **Period** field.

            A **default relative period for analysis** can be set in the **Systems Settings**
            app.

            If you select a relative period covering multiple years/months/weeks/days
            the layer can be displayed as

            -   Único (agregado)

                Mostra os valores agregados para o período relativo selecionado (padrão).

            -   Linha do tempo

                Includes a timeline allowing you to step through the periods.
                Only one timeline layer can be added to the same map.

            -   Divida as visualizações do mapa

                Show multiple maps allowing you to compare different periods
                side by side. Supported for relative periods with 12 items
                or below. Can not be combined with other layer types.

        -   Período fixo

            In the **Period type** field select period length, then
            select the target in the **Period** field.

        -   Datas de início/término

            In the **Period type** field select **Start/end dates**
            and fill in a start date and an end date.

3.  In the **Org Units** tab:

    ![](resources/images/maps_thematic_layer_dialog_ORG_UNITS.png)

    -   Select the organisation units you want to include in the layer.
        It is possible to select either

        -   One or more specific organisation units, organisation unit levels in
            the hierarchy, organisation unit groups, or

        -   A relative level in the organisation unit hierarchy, with
            respect to the user. By selecting a **User organisation
            unit** the map data will appear differently for users at
            different levels in the organisation unit hierarchy.

    -   **Use associated geometry**: This dropdown will only show if there
        are any additional geometry available for your organisation units.
        This is typically used to show facility catchment areas.

4.  In the **Filter** tab:

    ![](resources/images/maps_thematic_layer_dialog_FILTER.png)

    -   Click **Add Filter** and select an available data item to add a new
        filter to the data set.

        -   Select a data dimension from the dropdown box. You can
            reduce the number of dimensions shown by using the search field.
            Click on the name to select a dimension.

        -   When a dimension is selected you get a second dropdown with
            dimension items. Check the items you want to include in the
            filter.

        Multiple filters may be added. Click the trash button on the right of
        the filter to remove it.

5.  In the **Style** tab:

    ![](resources/images/maps_thematic_layer_dialog_STYLE.png)

    -   Select either **Choropleth** or **Bubble map**.

        -   Choropleth will assign a color to each org unit shape according to the data value. This is the recommended technique if the data is normalised (per capita).

        -   Bubble map will show data values as proportional circles. Use this
            technique if the data is not normalised (absolute numbers). The circles are placed in the center of each org unit.

    -   Defina **Raio baixo** e **Raio alto** para os círculos proporcionais ou unidades sanitárias em pontos. Os círculos serão escalados entre raios baixo e alto de acordo com o valor dos dados. O raio deve estar entre 0 e 50 px.

    -   **Show labels**: Allows org unit names and values to be shown on the layer.
        Select between "Name", "Name and value" and "Value" only. Font size, weight, style
        and color can also be modified.

    -   **Show no data**: By default org units with missing data values will not show on the map.
        Check this box if you want to show them with a color. Click the color to change it.

    -   Select the legend type:

        -   **Automatic color legend**: the application will create a legend for you based on
            what classification method, number of classes and the color scale you select. Set
            **Classification** to either:

            -   Intervalos iguais

                the range of each interval will be (highest data value - lowest data value / number of classes)

            -   Contagens iguais

                o criador da legenda tentará distribuir as unidades de organização uniformemente.

        -   **Legenda de cores predefinidas**: Selecione entre as legendas predefinidas.

        -   **Single color legend**: Select the color of the bubbles or circles. Only available
            for bubble maps.

6.  Click **Add layer**.

### Modificar uma camada temática { #modify-a-thematic-layer } 

1.  In the layer panel, click the edit (pencil) icon on the thematic
    layer card.

2.  Modifique a configuração em qualquer uma das guias conforme desejado.

3.  Click **Update layer**.

### Filtrar valores em uma camada temática { #filter-values-in-a-thematic-layer } 

Thematic layers have a **Show/hide data table** option that can be toggled on or
off from the thematic layer card.

![](resources/images/maps_thematic_layer_data_table.png)

A tabela de dados exibe os dados que formam a camada temática.

-   clicking on a up/down arrow button will sort the table based on that column;
    toggling between ascending and descending.

-   entering text or expressions into the filter fields below the titles
    will apply those filters to the data, and the display will adjust
    according to the filter. The filters are applied as follows:

    -   NOME

        filtrar por nome contendo o texto fornecido

    -   VALOR

        filter values by given numbers and/or ranges, for example:
        2,\>3&\<8

    -   LEGENDA

        filtrar por legenda contendo o texto fornecido

    -   FAIXA

        filtrar por intervalos contendo o texto fornecido

    -   NÍVEL

        nível de filtro por números e/ou intervalos, por exemplo: 2, \> 3 & \ <8

    -   PARENTE

        filtrar por nomes de parentes contendo o texto fornecido

    -   ID

        filtrar por IDs contendo o texto fornecido

    -   MODELO

        filtrar por tipos de exibição GIS contendo o texto dado

    -   COR

        filtrar por nomes de cores contendo o texto fornecido

> **Note**
>
> Data table filters are temporary and are not saved with the map layers
> as part of the saved map.

### Procure uma unidade organizacional { #search-for-an-organisation-unit } 

The NAME filter field in the data table provides an effective way of
searching for individual organisation units.

### Open organisation unit profile { #open-organisation-unit-profile } 

You can open the [organisation unit profile](#using_maps_org_unit_profile) in three ways:

1. Click on any of the organisasjon units shown on the map, and click
   the **View profile** button in the popup.

2. Right-click one of the organisation units on the map, and select **View profile**
   from the menu.

3. Click on an organisation unit row in the **data table**.

### Navegue entre as hierarquias da organização { #navigate-between-organisation-hierarchies } 

When there are visible organisation units on the map, you can easily
navigate up and down in the hierarchy without using the level/parent
user interface.

1.  Clique com o botão direito em uma das unidades de organização.

2.  Selecione **Drill up one level** ou **Drill down one level**.

    The drill down option is disabled if you are on the lowest level or
    if there are no coordinates available on the level below. Likewise
    the drill up option is disabled from the highest level.

### Remover camada temática { #remove-thematic-layer } 

Para limpar todos os dados em uma camada temática:

1.  In the layer card to the left, click the _more actions_ (three dots) icon
    and then on **Remove layer**.

    A camada é removida do mapa atual.

## Gerir camadas de eventos { #using_maps_event_layer }

The event layer displays the geographical location of events registered
in the DHIS2 tracker. Provided that events have associated point or polygon
coordinates, you can use this layer to drill down from the aggregated
data displayed in the thematic layers to the underlying individual
events or cases.

You can also display aggregated events for facilities or organisation
units. You do this through a thematic layer using event data
items. This is useful when you only have the coordinates for the Org
Unit under which the events are recorded.

![](resources/images/maps_event_layer.png)

Event layers are represented by layer _cards_ in the layer panel such
as:

Ao longo da parte superior do card do evento, da esquerda para a direita:

-   Um campo de captura para permitir arrastar e reordenar as camadas com o mouse

-   O título e o período associados à camada

-   Um símbolo de seta para recolher e expandir o cartão de evento

In the middle of the event card is a legend indicating the styling of
the layer.

Ao longo da parte inferior do card do evento, da esquerda para a direita:

-   Um botão de edição (lápis) para abrir a caixa de diálogo de configuração da camada

-   Um símbolo de olho para alternar a visibilidade da camada

-   Um controle deslizante para modificar a transparência da camada

-   Um botão de mais ações (três pontos) com opções adicionais:

    -   A **Show/hide data table** toggle button to show or hide the data table associated with the layer

    -   **Descarregar de dados** permite que baixe os dados para esta camada no formato GeoJSON para uso em outro software de mapeamento

    -   **Editar camada** é igual ao botão editar acima

    -   **Remover camada** irá remover esta camada do mapa atual.

### Crie uma camada de evento { #maps_create_event_layer }

To create an event layer, choose **Events** on the **Add
layer** selection. This opens the Events layer configuration dialog.

1.  In the **Data** tab:

    ![](resources/images/maps_event_layer_dialog_DATA.png)

    -   Select a program and then select a program stage. The **Stage**
        field is only shown once a program is selected.

        If there is only one stage available for the selected program,
        the stage is automatically selected.

    -   Select a value from the **Coordinate field** for the positions
        shown on the map. By default, "Event location" is selected.
        Depending on the data elements or attributes that belong to a
        program, other coordinates such as "Household position" are
        available.

    -   By default all events with coordinates are shown on the map.
        Use the **Event status** field to only show events having one
        status: Active, Completed, Schedule, Overdue or Skipped.

2.  In the **Period** tab

    ![](resources/images/maps_event_layer_dialog_PERIOD.png)

    -   select the time span for when the events took place. You can
        select either a fixed period or a relative period.

        -   Período relativo

            In the **Period** field, select one of the relative periods,
            for example **This month** or **Last year**.

            A **default relative period for analysis** can be set in the
            **Systems Settings** app.

        -   Período fixo

            In the **Period** field, select **Start/end dates** and fill
            in a start date and an end date.

3.  In the **Org Units** tab:

    ![](resources/images/maps_event_layer_dialog_ORG_UNITS.png)

    -   Select the organisation units you want to include in the layer.
        It is possible to select either

        -   Uma ou mais unidades de organização específicas, ou

        -   A relative level in the organisation unit hierarchy, with
            respect to the user. By selecting a **User organisation
            unit** the map data will appear differently for users at
            different levels in the organisation unit hierarchy.

4.  In the **Filter** tab:

    ![](resources/images/maps_event_layer_dialog_FILTER.png)

    -   Click ADD FILTER and select an available data item to add a new
        filter to the data set.

        -   For data item of type _option set_, you can select any of
            the options from the dropdown box by using the down-wards
            arrow or by start typing directly in the box to filter for
            options.

        -   For data item of type _number_, you can select operators like
            equal, not equal, greater than or less than.

        -   For data item of type _boolean_ (yes/no), you can check the box
            if the condition should be valid or true.

        -   For data item of type _text_ you will get two choices:
            **Contains** implies that the query will match all values
            which contains your search value, and **Is exact** implies
            that only values which is completely identical to your
            search query will be returned.

        Multiple filters may be added. Click the trash button on the right of
        the filter to remove it.

5.  In the **Style** tab:

    ![](resources/images/maps_event_layer_dialog_STYLE.png)

    -   Select **Group events** to group nearby events (cluster), or
        **View all events** to display events individually.

    -   Selecione uma **cor** para o evento ou pontos de cluster.

    -   Selecione o **raio** (entre 1 e 20) para os eventos.

    -   Select **Show buffer** to display visual buffer around each
        event. The radius of the buffer can be modified here. This
        option is only available if you select **View all events**
        above.

    -   Select a **Style by data element** to colorise the events
        according to a data value. If you also select to group events,
        the culsters will be displayed as small donut charts showing
        the distribution of the data values. The available options vary for
        different data types:

        -   **Option sets**: Select a color for each option in an option
            set. You can set default colors for an option in the
            Maintenance app.

        -   **Numbers**: You can style a numeric data element in [the same
            way as thematic layers](#using_maps_thematic_layer_style) using
            automatic or predefined legends.

        -   **Booleans**: Select a color for true/yes and another for
            false/no.

6.  Click **Add layer**.

### Modificar uma camada de evento { #modify-an-event-layer } 

1.  In the layer panel, click the edit (pencil) icon on the event layer
    card.

2.  Modify the setting on the DATA, PERIOD, FILTER, ORG UNIT and STYLE
    tabs as desired.

3.  Click **Update layer**.

### Listing and filtering events { #listing-and-filtering-events } 

Event layers have a **Show/hide data table** option that can be toggled on or
off from the event layer card.

![](resources/images/maps_event_layer_data_table.png)

The data table displays the data forming the event layer.

-   clicking on the up/down arrow will sort the table based on that column;
    toggling between ascending and descending.

-   entering text or expressions into the filter fields below the titles
    will apply those filters to the data, and the display will adjust
    according to the filter. The filters are applied as follows:

    -   ID

        filter by event IDs containing the given text

    -   ORG UNIT

        filter by org unit name containing the given text

    -   EVENT TIME

        filter by event time containing the given text

    -   MODELO

        filtrar por tipos de exibição GIS contendo o texto dado

    -   **Style by data element**: If events are styled by a data element
        (e.g. gender) both the data value and the color can be filtered.

    -   **Display in reports**: Data elements checked to display in reports will
        be shown in separate columns (see below how to add them).

    -   Numeric data values can be filtered by given numbers, and/or ranges,
        for example: 2,\>3&\<8

> **Note**
>
> Data table filters are temporary and are not saved with the map layers
> as part of the saved map.

### Modify information in event data table and popups { #modify-information-in-event-data-table-and-popups } 

If you have access to the selected program in the Maintenance app, you can modify the information displayed in the event pop-up window.

![](resources/images/maps_eventlayer_eventinfopopup.png)

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Manutenção **.

2.  Selecione ** Programa **.

3.  Click the program you want to modify and select **(2) Assign data elements**.

4.  For every data element you want to display in the pop-up window,
    select corresponding **Display in reports**.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Baixar dados brutos da camada de evento { #download-raw-event-layer-data } 

Os dados brutos para camadas de eventos podem ser baixados no formato GeoJSON para geoanálise e processamento mais avançados em software de desktop GIS como [QGIS] (https://www.qgis.org/). Os dados baixados incluem todos os eventos individuais como recursos do GeoJSON, incluindo atributos para cada elemento de dados selecionado para ** Exibir em relatórios **.

![](resources/images/maps_data_download_dialog.png)

-   Na secção de camada à esquerda, clique no ícone _mais ações_ (três pontos) e em ** Baixar dados **

-   Selecione o **formato de ID** para usar como a chave para os valores do elemento de dados no arquivo GeoJSON baixado. Existem três opções disponíveis:

    -   **ID** - Use o ID exclusivo do elemento de dados
    -   **Nome** - Use o nome amigável do elemento de dados (traduzido)
    -   **Código** - Use o código do elemento de dados

-   Selecione se deseja ou não ** Usar chaves legíveis ** para outros atributos do Evento, como Estágio do Programa, Latitude, Longitude, Dados do Evento e ID, Nome e Código da Unidade da Organização. Quando esta opção é **não** selecionada, esses valores serão o ID amigável ao computador em vez do nome legível (e traduzido) por humanos.

-   Click the **Download** button to generate and download a GeoJSON file. The data will be requested from the DHIS2 server and processed by the maps application. This operation may take several minutes to complete.

-   Uma vez que o arquivo GeoJSON foi baixado, ele pode ser importado para a maioria dos aplicativos de software GIS padrão.

> Observe que os dados baixados não incluem informações de estilo, pois não são nativamente suportados pelo formato GeoJSON. Os estilos podem ser recriados opcionalmente em aplicativos GIS externos usando os atributos de cada recurso.

### Limpar camada de evento { #clear-event-layer } 

Para limpar todos os dados da camada de evento em um mapa:

1.  In the layer card to the left, click the _more actions_ (three dots) icon
    and then on **Remove layer**.

    A camada é removida do mapa atual.

## Gerenciar camadas de entidades rastreadas { #using_maps_tracked_entity_layer }

The tracked entity layer displays the geographical location of tracked
entities registered in the DHIS2. Provided that tracked entities have
associated point or polygon coordinates, you can explore these on a map.

![](resources/images/maps_tracked_entity_layer.png)

Tracked entity layers are represented by layer cards in the layer panel
such as:

Ao longo da parte superior do cartão de entidade rastreada, da esquerda para a direita:

-   A grab field to allow dragging and re-ordering layers with the
    mouse.

-   O título e o período associados à camada.

-   Um símbolo de seta para recolher e expandir o cartão de entidade rastreada.

In the middle of the tracked entity card is a legend indicating the
styling of the layer.

Ao longo da parte inferior da secção de entidade rastreada, da esquerda para a direita:

-   Um botão de edição (lápis) para abrir a caixa de diálogo de configuração da camada

-   Um símbolo de olho para alternar a visibilidade da camada

-   Um controle deslizante para modificar a transparência da camada

-   Um botão de mais ações (três pontos) com opções adicionais:

    -   **Editar camada** é igual ao botão editar acima

    -   **Remover camada** irá remover esta camada do mapa atual.

### Crie uma camada de entidade rastreada { #maps_create_tracked_enity_layer }

To create an tracked entity layer, choose **Tracked entities** on the
**Add layer** selection. This opens the Tracked entity layer
configuration dialog.

1.  In the **Data** tab:

    ![](resources/images/maps_tracked_entity_layer_dialog_DATA.png)

    -   Selecione o ** Tipo de entidade rastreada ** que deseja mostrar no mapa.

    -   Selecione um ** Programa ** ao qual pertencem as entidades rastreadas.

    -   Use the **Program status** field to select the enrollment status of tracked entities
        to include: All, Active, Completed or Cancelled.

    -   Set the **Follow up** status of the tracked entity for the given
        program.

2.  Na aba **Relacionamentos**

    ![](resources/images/maps_tracked_entity_layer_dialog_RELATIONSHIPS.png)

    > **Caution**
    >
    > Displaying tracked entity relationships in Maps is an experimental feature

    -   If a Tracked Entity Type with relationships has been selected, you can select the **Display Tracked Entity relationships** checkbox

    -   Once checked, you can select the type of relationship to display on the map from the dropdown list. Only relationships from the selected Tracked Entity type are available.

3.  In the **Period** tab

    ![](resources/images/maps_tracked_entity_layer_dialog_PERIOD.png)

    -   If no program is selected, you can set start and end dates when
        the tracked entities were last updated.

    -   If a program is selected, you can set the period when tracked entities were last
        updated or when they were registered or enrolled in the program.

4.  In the **Org Units** tab:

    ![](resources/images/maps_tracked_entity_layer_dialog_ORG_UNITS.png)

    -   Select the organisation units you want to include in the layer.
        You have 3 selection modes:

        -   **Selected only**: Include tracked entities belonging to
            selected org units only.

        -   **Selected and below**: Included tracked entities in and
            right below selected org units.

        -   **Selected and all below**: Included tracked entities in and
            all below selected org units.

5.  In the **Style** tab:

    ![](resources/images/maps_tracked_entity_layer_dialog_STYLE.png)

    -   Selecione uma **cor** para os pontos e polígonos das entidades rastreadas.

    -   Select the **point size** (radius between 1 and 20) for the
        points.

    -   Select **Show buffer** to display visual buffer around each
        tracked entity. The buffer distance in meters can be modified
        here.

    -   Se um tipo de relacionamento foi selecionado na guia de relacionamentos, pode selecionar **cor**, **tamanho do ponto** e **cor da linha** para relacionamentos e instâncias de entidades rastreadas relacionadas

6.  Click **Add/Update layer**.

### Modificar uma camada de entidade rastreada { #modify-a-tracked-entity-layer } 

1.  In the layer panel, click the edit (pencil) icon on the tracked
    entity layer card.

2.  Modify the setting on the DATA, PERIOD, ORG UNIT and STYLE tabs as
    desired.

3.  Click **Update layer**.

### Limpar uma camada de entidade rastreada { #clear-a-tracked-entity-layer } 

Para limpar uma camada de entidade rastreada de um mapa:

1.  In the layer card to the left, click the _more actions_ (three dots) icon
    and then on **Remove layer**.

    A camada é removida do mapa atual.

## Geir camadas de instalações { #using_maps_facility_layer }

The facility layer displays icons that represent types of facilities.
Polygons do not show up on the map, so make sure that you select an
organisation unit level that has facilities.

_A polygon is an enclosed area on a map representing a country, a
district or a park._

![](resources/images/maps_facility_layer.png)

Facility layers are represented by layer _cards_ in the layer panel such
as:

Ao longo da parte superior da secção de unidades sanitárias, da esquerda para a direita:

-   Um campo de captura para permitir arrastar e reordenar as camadas com o mouse

-   O título das **Unidades Sanitárias**

-   Um símbolo de olho para alternar a visibilidade da camada

-   Um símbolo de seta para recolher e expandir a secção de unidades sanitárias

In the middle of the facilities card is a legend indicating the group
set representation.

Ao longo da parte inferior da secção de unidades sanitárias, da esquerda para a direita:

-   Um botão de edição (lápis) para abrir a caixa de diálogo de configuração da camada

-   Um controle deslizante para modificar a transparência da camada

-   Um botão de mais ações (três pontos) com opções adicionais:

    -   A **Show/hide data table** toggle button to show or hide the data table
        associated with the layer

    -   **Descarregar de dados** permite que baixe os dados para esta camada no formato GeoJSON para uso em outro software de mapeamento

    -   **Editar camada** é igual ao botão editar acima

    -   **Remover camada** irá remover esta camada do mapa atual.

### Crie uma camada de instalação { #create-a-facility-layer } 

To create facility layer, choose **Facilities** on the **Add
layer**selection. This opens the Facility layer configuration dialog.

1.  In the **Organisation Units** tab

    ![](resources/images/maps_facility_layer_dialog_ORG_UNITS.png)

    -   Select the organisation unit level(s) and/or group(s) from the
        selection fields on the right hand side.

    -   Select the organisation units you want to include in the layer.
        It is possible to select either

        -   Uma ou mais unidades de organização específicas, ou

        -   A relative level in the organisation unit hierarchy, with
            respect to the user. By selecting a **User organisation
            unit** the map data will appear differently for users at
            different levels in the organisation unit hierarchy.

    -   The system administrator can set the default organsation unit
        level containing facilities in the **System Settings** app.

    -   **Use associated geometry**: This dropdown will only show if there
        are any additional geometry available for your organisation units.
        This is typically used to show facility catchment areas.

2.  In the **Style** tab:

    ![](resources/images/maps_facility_layer_dialog_STYLE.png)

    -   Selecione qualquer estilo que deseja aplicar às unidades sanitárias.

        -   Mostrar rótulos

            Allows labels to be shown on the layer. Font size, weight
            and color can be modified here.

        -   Mostrar buffer

            Allows a visual buffer to be displayed on the layer around
            each facility. The radius of the buffer can be modified
            here. Buffer option is not available if asscoiated geometry is used.

    -   Facilities can be styled an **organisation unit group set** using
        different icons. Select a group set from the list of organisation
        unit group sets defined for your DHIS2 instance.
        The system administrator can set the default organsation unit
        group set in the **System Settings** app.

    -   If no group set is selected, the facilities will be shown as filled
        circles. The color and the circle radius can be changed.

3.  Click **Add layer**.

### Criar ou modificar uma camada de instalação { #create-or-modify-a-facility-layer } 

1.  In the layer panel, click the edit (pencil) icon on the facility
    layer card.

2.  Modify the setting on the GROUP SET, ORGANISATION UNITS and STYLE
    tabs as desired.

3.  Click **Update layer**.

### Filtrar valores em uma camada de instalação { #filter-values-in-a-facility-layer } 

Facility layers have a **Show/hide data table** option that can be toggled on or
off from the facility layer card.

![](resources/images/maps_facility_layer_data_table.png)

A tabela de dados exibe os dados que formam a camada de unidade sanitária.

-   clicking on the up/down arrow will sort the table based on that column;
    toggling between ascending and descending.

-   entering text or expressions into the filter fields below the titles
    will apply those filters to the data, and the display will adjust
    according to the filter. The filters are applied as follows:

    -   NOME

        filtrar por nome contendo o texto fornecido

    -   ID

        filtrar por IDs contendo o texto fornecido

    -   MODELO

        filtrar por tipos de exibição GIS contendo o texto dado

> **Note**
>
> Data table filters are temporary and are not saved with the map layers
> as part of the saved map.

### Procure uma instalação { #search-for-a-facility } 

The NAME filter field in the data table provides an effective way of
searching for individual facilities.

### Open organisation unit profile { #open-organisation-unit-profile } 

You can open the [organisation unit profile](#using_maps_org_unit_profile) in three ways:

1. Click on any of the organisasjon units shown on the map, and click
   the **View profile** button in the popup.

2. Right-click one of the organisation units on the map, and select **View profile**
   from the menu.

3. Click on an organisation unit row in the **data table**.

### Remover camada de instalação { #remove-facility-layer } 

Para limpar todos os dados em uma camada de unidade sanitária:

1.  In the layer card to the left, click the _more actions_ (three dots) icon
    and then on **Remove layer**.

    A camada é removida do mapa atual.

## Gerir camadas da unidade organizacional { #using_maps_org_unit_layer }

The org unit layer displays the borders and locations of your
organisation units. This layer is particularly useful if you are offline
and don't have access to background maps.

![](resources/images/maps_org_unit_layer.png)

Org unit layers are represented by layer _cards_ in the layer panel such
as:

Na parte superior da secção da unidade organizacional, da esquerda para a direita:

-   Um campo de captura para permitir arrastar e reordenar as camadas com o mouse

-   O título da **Unidade organizacional**

-   Um símbolo de seta para recolher e expandir a secção da unidade organizacional

Na parte superior da secção da unidade organizacional, da esquerda para a direita:

-   Um botão de edição (lápis) para abrir a caixa de diálogo de configuração da camada

-   Um símbolo de olho para alternar a visibilidade da camada

-   Um controle deslizante para modificar a transparência da camada

-   Um botão de mais ações (três pontos) com opções adicionais:

    -   A **Show/hide data table** toggle button to show or hide the data table
        associated with the layer

    -   **Descarregar de dados** permite que baixe os dados para esta camada no formato GeoJSON para uso em outro software de mapeamento

    -   **Editar camada** é igual ao botão editar acima

    -   **Remover camada** irá remover esta camada do mapa atual.

### Create an org unit layer { #create-an-org-unit-layer } 

To create an org unit layer, choose **Org units** on the **Add
layer** selection. This opens the org unit layer configuration dialog.

1.  Na aba **UNIDADES DE ORGANIZAÇÃO**

    ![](resources/images/maps_org_unit_layer_dialog_ORG_UNITS.png)

    -   select the organisation unit level(s) and/or group(s) from the
        selection fields on the right hand side.

    -   Select the organisation units you want to include in the layer.
        It is possible to select either

        -   Uma ou mais unidades de organização específicas, ou

        -   A relative level in the organisation unit hierarchy, with
            respect to the user. By selecting a **User organisation
            unit** the map data will appear differently for users at
            different levels in the organisation unit hierarchy.

    -   **Use associated geometry**: This dropdown will only show if there
        are any additional geometry available for your organisation units.
        This is typically used to show facility catchment areas.

2.  In the **Style** tab:

    ![](resources/images/maps_org_unit_layer_dialog_STYLE.png)

    -   select any styling you wish to apply to the org unitss.

        -   Labels

            Allows labels to be shown on the layer. Font style can be
            modified here.

        -   Boundary color

            Allows the boundary or outline color of the organisation units
            to be changed.

        -   Raio do ponto

            Sets the base radius when point type elements, such as
            facilities, are presented on the org unit layer.

    -   Organisation units can be styled an **organisation unit group set**
        using different colors. Select a group set from the list of organisation
        unit group sets defined for your DHIS2 instance.

3.  Click **Add layer**.

### Modify an org unit layer { #modify-an-org-unit-layer } 

1.  In the layer panel, click the edit (pencil) icon on the org unit
    layer card.

2.  Modify the setting on the ORGANISATION UNITS and STYLE tabs as
    desired.

3.  Click **Update layer**.

### Filter values in an org unit layer { #filter-values-in-an-org-unit-layer } 

Org unit layers have a **Show/hide data table** option that can be toggled on or
off from the org unit layer card.

![](resources/images/maps_bound_layer_data_table.png)

The data table displays the data forming the org unit layer.

-   clicking on a title will sort the table based on that column;
    toggling between ascending and descending.

-   entering text or expressions into the filter fields below the titles
    will apply those filters to the data, and the display will adjust
    according to the filter. The filters are applied as follows:

    -   NOME

        filtrar por nome contendo o texto fornecido

    -   NÍVEL

        nível de filtro por números e/ou intervalos, por exemplo: 2, \> 3 & \ <8

    -   PARENTE

        filtrar por nomes de parentes contendo o texto fornecido

    -   ID

        filtrar por IDs contendo o texto fornecido

    -   MODELO

        filtrar por tipos de exibição GIS contendo o texto dado

> **Note**
>
> Data table filters are temporary and are not saved with the map layers
> as part of the saved map.

### Pesquise uma unidade organizacional { #search-for-an-organisational-unit } 

The NAME filter field in the data table provides an effective way of
searching for individual organisational units displayed in the org unit
layer.

### Open organisation unit profile { #open-organisation-unit-profile } 

You can open the [organisation unit profile](#using_maps_org_unit_profile) in three ways:

1. Click on any of the organisasjon units shown on the map, and click
   the **View profile** button in the popup.

2. Right-click one of the organisation units on the map, and select **View profile**
   from the menu.

3. Click on an organisation unit row in the **data table**.

### Navegue entre as hierarquias da organização { #navigate-between-organisation-hierarchies } 

You can modify the target of the org unit layer in the hierarchy without
using the level/parent user interface.

1.  Clique com o botão direito em uma das unidades de organização.

2.  Selecione **Drill up one level** ou **Drill down one level**.

    The drill down option is disabled if you are on the lowest level.
    Likewise the drill up option is disabled from the highest level.

### Remove org unit layer { #remove-org-unit-layer } 

To clear all data in an org unit layer:

1.  In the layer card to the left, click the _more actions_ (three dots) icon
    and then on **Remove layer**.

    A camada é removida do mapa atual.

## Gerir camada do Earth Engine { #using_maps_gee }

![](resources/images/maps_ee_layer.png)

Google Earth Engine layers are enabled if a Google Earth Engine API key has been configured for your system. Contact your system administrator if you need access to these layers.

The layers from Google Earth Engine let you display and aggregate external
data to your organisation units. Use the population layer to calculate the
number of people living in a district, or within a distance from a health
facility. The elevation layer allows you to find the lowest, highest and
mean elevation. Use the landcover layer to see the forest cover, croplands
or urban areas, and calculate the percentage for each organisation unit.

The following layer sources are supported and displayed by default:

![](resources/images/maps_ee_layer_types.png)

-   **Population**: Detailed population data from WorldPop showing the estimated
    number of people living in an area. Available for 2020.

-   **Population age groups**: Estimated number of people living in an area, grouped
    by age and gender. Available for 2020.

-   **Building footprints**: The outlines of buildings derived from high-resolution
    satellite imagery. Only for Sub-Saharan Africa, South and South-East Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean.

-   **Elevação**: Elevação acima do nível do mar.

-   **Precipitation**: Accumulated liquid and frozen water, including rain and snow, that falls to the surface. Combines model data with observations from across the world. Available monthly, from 1950.

-   **Temperature**: Temperature at 2m above the surface. Combines model data with observations from across the world. Available monthly, from 1950.

-   **Land cover**: 17 distinct landcover types collected from satellites by NASA. Available yearly, between 2001 and 2022.

> **Note**
>
> The [**Maps app administrator**](#maps_app_administrator) can show or hide layer sources from other users.

### Crie uma camada do Earth Engine { #create-an-earth-engine-layer } 

To create an Earth Engine layer, choose the desired layer from the **Add
layer** selection. This opens the layer configuration dialog.

1.  In the **Data** tab:

    ![](resources/images/maps_ee_layer_dialog_DATA.png)

    -   For "population age groups" you can select the age/gender **groups**
        you would like to include when aggregating the data.

    -   Select the **aggregation methods** you would like to use when calculating
        values for the selected organisation units (some option might not be available depending on the layer source).

        -   **Sum**: Calculates the total number within each organisation unit.
            Recommended to use for the population layers.

        -   **Min**: Returns the minimum value in the layer unit displayed below the
            selection. For population layers it will be the minimum _people per
            hectar_. For elevation layer it will return the lowest elevation (meters
            above sea level).

        -   **Max**: Returns the maximum value in the layer unit. For population
            layers it will be the minimum _people per hectar_. For elevation layer it
            will return the highest elevation for each organisation unit.

        -   **Mean**: Returns the mean value in the layer unit. For population layers
            it will be the mean _people per hectar_. For precipitation layer it will
            be the mean rainfall in millimeters across the organisation unit.

        -   **Median**: Returns the mean value in the layer unit. For population layers
            it will be the median _people per hectar_. For temperature layer it will
            be the median °C during daytime for the organisation unit.

        -   **Standard deviation**: Returns the standard deviation value in the layer
            unit.

        -   **Variância**: Retorna o valor da variação na unidade da camada.

        -   **Special cases**:
            -   For "building footprints": **Count**: Returns the number of buildings within each organisation unit. Note that building counts are only available for smaller organisation unit areas.
            -   For "landcover": **Percentage**, **Hectar**, **Acres**: Return the area covered by each landcover category within each organisation in different units.

2.  In the **Period** tab

    ![](resources/images/maps_ee_layer_dialog_PERIOD.png)

    -   Select the period for the data source. The available periods are set by
        layer source. Sources are available either montly or yearly others are available at a single point in time.

3.  In the **Organisation Units** tab:

    ![](resources/images/maps_ee_layer_dialog_ORG_UNITS.png)

    -   Select the organisation units you where you want to see aggregated data values.
        It is possible to select either

        -   One or more specific organisation units, organisation unit levels in
            the hierarchy, organisation unit groups, or

        -   A relative level in the organisation unit hierarchy, with
            respect to the user. By selecting a **User organisation
            unit** the map data will appear differently for users at
            different levels in the organisation unit hierarchy.

    -   **Use associated geometry**: This dropdown will only show if there
        are any additional geometry available for your organisation units.
        This is typically used to calculate values for facility catchment areas.

4.  In the **Style** tab

    ![](resources/images/maps_ee_layer_dialog_STYLE.png)

    -   Modifique os parâmetros específicos do tipo de camada.

    -   Ajuste o intervalo da legenda, etapas e cores, conforme desejado.

    -   If you select organisation units having a single point coordinate
        (facilities) you can set a radius buffer to calculate the
        data value within. A radius of 5000 meters will aggregate all
        values available within a 5 km distance from a facility. Buffer
        option is not available if associated geometry is used.

5.  Click **Add layer**.

Click on the map regions or facilities to see the aggregation result for that
organisation unit.

### Listing of data values { #listing-of-data-values } 

Earth Engine layers have a **Show/hide data table** option that can be toggled on or
off from the layer card.

![](resources/images/maps_ee_layer_data_table.png)

The data table displays all the aggregated values for the organisation units selected.

-   Clicking on the up/down button will sort the table based on that column;
    toggling between ascending and descending.

-   Entering text or expressions into the filter fields below the titles
    will apply those filters to the data, and the display will adjust
    according to the filter. The filters are applied as follows:

    -   NOME

        filtrar por nome contendo o texto fornecido

    -   ID

        filtrar por IDs contendo o texto fornecido

    -   MODELO

        filtrar por tipos de exibição GIS contendo o texto dado

    -   AGGREGATION VALUES ("Sum" and "Mean" in the example above)

        there is one column for each of the aggregation types selected
        valores de dados numéricos podem ser filtrados por números fornecidos e/ou intervalos, por exemplo: 2,\>3&\<8

> **Nota**
>
> Os filtros da tabela de dados são temporários e não são salvos com as camadas do mapa.

## Adicionar camadas de mapa externas { #using_maps_external_map_layers }

![](resources/images/maps_terrain_imagery.png)

External map layers are represented as either basemaps or overlays.

> **Note**
>
> The [**Maps app administrator**](#maps_app_administrator) can add external map layers.

-   Mapas base

    These are available in the **basemap** card in the layers panel and
    are selected as any other basemap.

-   Sobreposições

    These are available in the **Add layer** selection. Unlike basemaps,
    overlays can be placed above or below any other overlay layers.

Overlay layers are represented by additional layer _cards_ in the layer
panel such as:

Ao longo da parte superior do cartão de sobreposição, da esquerda para a direita:

-   Um campo de captura para permitir arrastar e reordenar as camadas com o mouse

-   O título da camada externa do mapa

-   Um símbolo de seta para recolher e expandir a secção de sobreposição

No meio da secção há uma legenda, se a camada tiver uma.

Ao longo da parte inferior da secção de sobreposição, da esquerda para a direita:

-   Um controle deslizante para modificar a transparência da camada

-   A delete (trash can) icon to remove the layer from the current
    thematic map.

### GeoJSON external layers { #geojson-external-layers } 

If you add a GeoJSON external layer to your map, you will have a few style choices:

![](resources/images/maps_geojson_external_layer_style.png)

Once the GeoJSON layer has been displayed, you can view the data table

![](resources/images/maps_geojson_external_layer_data_table.png)

As with other layers, you can sort and filter the data. If you want to view the data for one row, click on the row to open the Feature Profile:

![](resources/images/maps_geojson_external_layer_feature_profile.png)

## Organisation unit profile { #using_maps_org_unit_profile }

![](resources/images/maps_org_unit_profile.png)

The organisation unit profile shows detailed information about
each organisation unit. You can open the profile from org unit, facility
and thematic layers.

You can open the organisation unit profile in three ways:

1. Click on any of the organisasjon units shown on the map, and click
   the **View profile** button in the popup.

2. Right-click one of the organisation units on the map, and select **View profile**
   from the menu.

3. Click on an organisation unit row in the **data table**.

The profile will show on the right side of the map. The profile contents is
set by the system administrator.

## Menu de arquivo { #using_maps_file_menu }

![](resources/images/maps_file_menu.png)

Use the **File menu** to manage your maps. Several menu items will be
disabled until you open or save a map.

Saving your maps makes it easy to restore them later. It also gives you
the opportunity to share them with other users as an interpretation or
put it on the dashboard. You can save all types of layer configurations
as a saved map.

### Crie um novo mapa { #create-a-new-map } 

Clique em **Arquivo** \> **Novo**.

NB \! Isso limpará as camadas de mapa atuais que tem sem salvar.

### Abra um novo mapa { #open-a-new-map } 

1.  Clique em **Arquivo** \> **Abrir**. Uma caixa de diálogo é aberta com uma lista de mapas.

2.  Find the saved map you want to open. You can either use \< and \> or
    the search field to find a saved map. The list is filtered on every
    character that you enter. You can filter the list by selecting
    **Show all**, **Created by me** or **Created by others**.

3.  Clique no nome do mapa que deseja abrir.

### Salvar um mapa { #save-a-map } 

Depois de criar um mapa, é conveniente salvá-lo para uso posterior:

1.  Clique em **Arquivo** \> **Salvar**.

2.  Enter a **Name** (required) and a **Description** (optional) the
    first time you save a map.

3.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Salvar uma cópia de um mapa { #save-a-copy-of-a-map } 

1.  Clique em **Arquivo** \> **Salvar como ...**

2.  Enter a **Name** (required) and a **Description** (optional) for the
    map.

3.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Renomear um mapa { #rename-a-map } 

1.  Clique em **Arquivo** \> **Renomear**.

2.  Insira um novo **Nome** e / ou **Descrição** para seu mapa.

3.  Click **Rename**. The map is updated.

### Traduzir um mapa { #translate-a-map } 

1.  Clique em **Arquivo** \> **Traduzir**.

2.  Selecione o **Local** (idioma) de sua tradução.

3.  Enter a translated **Name** and **Description**. The original text
    will show below the field.

4.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Modificar as configurações de compartilhamento de um mapa { #modify-sharing-settings-for-a-map } 

After you have created a map and saved it, you can share the map with
everyone or a user group. To modify the sharing settings:

1.  Clique em **Arquivo** \> **Partilhar**. A caixa de diálogo de configurações de partilha é aberta.

2.  **Give access to a user or group**: In the text box, search for the name of the
    user or group you want to share your saved map with and select it.

    Select the access level and click on **Give access**.

    Repeat the step to add more users or groups.

3.  **Users and groups that currently have access**: For each user or group, choose the
    access level. The options are:

    -   No access: The public won't have access to the map. This setting is only applicable to All users.

    -   Apenas ver

    -   Ver e editar

    -   Remove access: Remove the access for groups or individuals.

4.  Click **Close** to close the dialog.

### Obtenha o link para um mapa { #get-the-link-to-a-map } 

1.  Clique em **Arquivo** \> **Obter link**. Uma caixa de diálogo de link é aberta.

2.  Copie o link.

### Excluir um mapa { #delete-a-map } 

1.  Clique em **Arquivo** \> **Excluir**. Uma caixa de diálogo de confirmação é exibida.

2.  Click **DELETE** to confirm that you want to delete the saved map.
    Your map is deleted and the layers are cleared from the view.

## Map interpretations and details { #mapsInterpretation }

An interpretation is a description of a map at a given period. This
information is also visible in the **Dashboard app**. Click
**Interpretations and details** in the top right of the workspace to open the
interpretations panel. The button is only clickable if the map is saved.

![](resources/images/maps_interpretations_panel.png)

### Veja as interpretações com base em períodos relativos { #view-interpretations-based-on-relative-periods } 

Para ver as interpretações de períodos relativos, como um ano atrás:

1.  Open a saved map with interpretations.

2.  Click **Interpretations and details** in the top right of the workspace to open
    the interpretations panel.

3.  Click on **See interpretation**. Your map displays the data and the date
    based on when the interpretation was created. To view other
    interpretations, click them.

![](resources/images/maps_interpretations_modal.png)

### Escreva a interpretação para um mapa { #write-interpretation-for-a-map } 

To create an interpretation, you first need to create a map and save it.
If you've shared your map with other people, the interpretation you
write is visible to those people.

1.  Open a saved map.

2.  Click **Interpretations and details** in the top right of the workspace to open
    the interpretations panel.

3.  A text field will appear with a placeholder "Write an interpretation" for users
    that have read access to the saved map.

4.  In the text field, type a comment, question or interpretation. You
    can also mention other users with '@username'. Start by typing '@'
    plus the first letters of the username or real name and a mentioning
    bar will display the available users. Mentioned users will receive
    an internal DHIS2 message with the interpretation or comment. You
    can see the interpretation in the **Dashboard app**.

5.  Click **Post interpretation** to save the interpretation.

### Alterar as configurações de compartilhamento para uma interpretação { #change-sharing-settings-for-an-interpretation } 

1.  Clique em uma interpretação (veja como ver uma interpretação acima).

2.  Click the share icon below the interpretation. The sharing settings
    dialog opens.

3.  Search for and add a users and user groups that you want to share
    your map with, and set the access level. Click on **Give access**.

4.  Change the access level for the users you want to modify:

    -   **View and edit**: Everyone can view and edit the object.

    -   **View only**: Everyone can view the object.

    -   **No access**: The public won't have access to the object. This
        setting is only applicable to All users.

    -   **Remove access**: Remove the access for groups or individuals.

5.  Click **Close** when sharing settings are updated.

![](resources/images/maps_interpretations_sharing.png)

## Salvar um mapa como uma imagem { #using_maps_image_export }

Pode baixar seu mapa como uma imagem ao clicar no botão Descarregar no menu superior

![](resources/images/maps_download.png)

You will enter a "download mode" where you can adjust the map layout before you
download the image. The left column gives you the following options:

-   **Show map name**: Select if you want to include the map name or not. This option
    is only available if the map is saved. To change the name, exit download mode and
    select _File_ > _Rename_.
-   **Show map description**: Select if you want to include the map description or not.
    This option is only available if a map description was added when the map was saved.
    To change the map description, exit download mode and select _File_ > _Rename_.
-   **Show legend**: Select if you want to include the map legend. If the map includes
    more than one layer, you can select the visibility for each legend.
-   **Show overview map**: Select if you want to include an overview map (often named
    inset map). This option will be disabled if there is not enough room for it in the
    right column.
-   **Show north arrow**: Select to include a north arrow on the map. The default
    position is the lower right corner of the map, but you can change it to another
    corner.
-   Clique em **Descarregar** para baixar seu mapa.

Resize your browser window to change the map dimensions. You can also reposition
both the main map and the overview map.

Map download is not supported in Internet Explorer or Safari. We recommend using Google Chrome or Firefox.

## Procure um local { #using_maps_search }

The place search function allows you to search for almost any location
or address. This function is useful in order to locate for example
sites, facilities, villages or towns on the map.

![](resources/images/maps_place_search.png)

1.  No lado direito da janela Mapas, clique no ícone da lupa.

2.  Digite o local que está a procurar.

    Uma lista de locais correspondentes aparece conforme digita.

3.  From the list, select a location. A pin indicates the location on
    the map.

## Medir distâncias e áreas em um mapa { #using_maps_measure_distance }

1.  In the upper left part of the map, put the cursor on the **Measure
    distances and areas** (ruler) icon and click **Create new
    measurement**.

2.  Adicione pontos ao mapa.

3.  Clique em **Concluir medição**.

![](resources/images/maps_measure_distance.png)

## Obtenha a latitude e longitude em qualquer local { #using_maps_latitude_longitude }

Right-click a point on the map and select **Show longitude/latitude**.
The values display in a pop-up window.

## Maps app administrator { #maps_app_administrator }

A **Maps** app administrator can be defined by the system administrator assigning the `F_EXTERNAL_MAP_LAYER_PUBLIC_ADD` authority.

The **Maps** app administrator is able to:

-   Select the sources for Google Earth Engine layers available to other users via the Manage available layer sources button.

![](resources/images/maps_admin_managesources_button.png)

-   Add new external layer sources via the Maintenance app.

![](resources/images/maps_admin_externallayer.png)

## Veja também { #see-also } 

-   [Manage
    legends](https://docs.dhis2.org/master/en/user/html/manage_legend.html)



# Analise dados em tabelas dinâmicas { #pivot } 

## Sobre o aplicativo Pivot Table { #pivot_about } 

With the **Pivot Table** app, you can create pivot tables based on all
available data dimensions in DHIS2. A pivot table is a dynamic tool for
data analysis which lets you summarize and arrange data according to its
dimensions. Examples of data dimensions in DHIS2 are:

  - data dimension itself (for example data elements, indicators and
    events)

  - períodos (representando o período de tempo para os dados)

  - organisation hierarchy (representing the geographical location of
    the data)

From these dimensions you can freely select *dimension items* to include
in the pivot table. You can create additional dimensions in DHIS2 with
the group set functionality. This allows for different aggregation
pathways, such as aggregation by "Partner" or facility type.

A pivot table can arrange data dimensions on *columns*, *rows*, and as
*filters*. When you place a data dimension on columns, the pivot table
will display one column per dimension item. If you place multiple data
dimensions on columns, the pivot table displays one column for all
combinations of the items in the selected dimensions. When you place a
data dimension on rows, the pivot table displays one row per dimension
item in a similar fashion. The dimensions you select as filters will not
be included in the pivot table, but will aggregate and filter the table
data based on the selected filter items.

> **Tip**
>
>   - You must select at least one dimension on columns or rows.
>
>   - You must include at least one period.
>
>   - Data element group sets and reporting rates can't appear in the
>     same pivot table.
>
>   - A pivot table can't contain more than the maximum number of
>     analytic records which have been specified in the system settings.
>     The maximum number of records could also be constrained by the
>     maximum RAM which is available to your browser. You will be
>     prompted with a warning if your requested table exceeds a
>     particular size. From this prompt, you can either cancel the
>     request or continue building the table. Consider making smaller
>     tables instead of one table which displays all of your data
>     elements and indicators together.
>
>   - The **Pivot Table** app supports drill-down and up for periods and
>     organisation unit. This means that you can for example drill down
>     from yearly periods to quarters, months and weeks inside a pivot
>     table. You can also drill down from the global organisation unit
>     to countries, provinces and facilities.

## Crie uma tabela dinâmica { #pivot_create } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Pivot Table **.

2.  In the menu to the left, select the dimension items you want to
    analyse, for example data elements or indicators.

3.  Click **Layout** and arrange the data dimensions as columns, rows
    and filters.

    Você pode manter a seleção padrão, se desejar.

4.  Clique em ** Actualizar **.

Neste exemplo, os indicadores são listados como colunas e os períodos como linhas.

![](resources/images/pivot_table/basic_pivot.png)

### Selecione os itens de dimensão { #select-dimension-items } 

The left menu lists sections for all available data dimensions. From
each section you can select any number of dimension items. As an
example, you can open the section for data elements and select any
number of data elements from the available list. You can select an item
by marking it and clicking on the arrow in the section header or simply
double-clicking on the item. Before you can use a data dimension in your
pivot table you must at least select one dimension item. If you arrange
a dimension as columns or rows but do not select any dimension items,
the dimension is ignored.

You must choose at least one data dimension type to create a pivot
table. The available types are described in this table:



Table: Data dimension types

| Data dimension type | Definition | Exemplos |
|---|---|---|
| Indicadores | An indicator is a calculated formula based on data elements. | Coverage of immunization across a specific district. |
| Elementos de dados | Represents the phenomenon for which data has been captured. | Number of malaria cases; number of BCG doses given. |
| Conjuntos de dados | A collection of data elements grouped for data collection. You can select : <br> * **Reporting rates**: the percentage of actual reports compared to the expected number of reports<br> * **Reporting rates on time**: the reporting rates based on timely form submissions. A timely submission must happen within a number of days after the reporting period.<br> * **Actual reports**: the actual number of reports<br> * **Actual reports on time**: the actual number of reports based on timely form submissions. A timely submission must happen within a number of days after the reporting period.<br> * **Expected reports**: the number of expected reports based on organisation units where the data set and the reporting frequency has been assigned. | Reporting rates for immunization and morbidity forms. |
| Event data items | A data element that is part of a program representing events that have been captured. | Average weight and height for children in a nutrition program. |
| Indicadores de programa | A calculated formula based on data elements in a program representing events. | Average BMI score for children in a nutrition program. |

You can combine these dimensions to display for example aggregate data
with reporting rates, or event data items together with program
indicators, all in the same pivot tables. For the "data element" data
dimension, you are also able to select "Totals" and "Details", which
will allow you to view different category combination options together
on the same pivot table.

For the period dimension you can choose between using fixed periods or
relative periods. An example of a fixed period is "January 2012". To
select fixed periods start by selecting a period type from the period
type list. You can then select periods from the list of available
periods.

Relative periods are periods relative to the current date. Examples of
relative periods are "Last month", "Last 12 months", "Last 5 years".
Relative periods can be selected by ticking the check-boxes next to each
period. The main advantage of using relative periods is that when you
save a pivot table favorite, it will stay updated with the latest data
as time goes by without the need for constantly updating it.

For the organisation unit dimension you can select any number of
organisation units from the hierarchy. To select all organisation units
below a specific parent organisation unit, right click and click "Select
all children". To manually select multiple organisation units, click and
hold the **Ctrl** key while clicking on organisation units. You can tick
"User org unit", "User sub-units" or "User sub-x2-units" in order to
dynamically insert the organisation unit or units associated with your
user account. This is useful when you save a pivot table favorite and
want to share it with other users, as the organisation units linked with
the other user's account will be used when viewing the favorite.


![](resources/images/pivot_table/period_dimension.png)

Dynamic dimensions can consist of organisation unit group sets, data
element group sets, or category option group sets which have been
configured with the type of "Disaggregation". Once the group sets have
been configured, they will be come available in the pivot tables, and
can be used as additional analysis dimensions, for instance to analyse
aggregate data by Type of organisation unit or Implementing partner.
Dynamic dimensions work the same as fixed dimensions.

> **Tip**
>
> Some dynamic dimensions may contain many items. This can cause issues
> with certain browsers due to the length of the URL when many dimension
> members are selected. A special "All" check box is available for
> dynamic dimensions, which allows you to include all available
> dimensions implicitly in your pivot table, without specifying each and
> every dimension member.

### Modificar o layout da tabela dinâmica { #modify-pivot-table-layout } 

After selecting data dimensions it is time to arrange your pivot table.
Click "Layout" in the top menu to open the layout screen. In this screen
you can position your data dimensions as table columns, rows or filters
by clicking and dragging the dimensions from the dimensions list to the
respective column, row and filter lists. You can set any number of
dimensions in any of the lists. For instance, you can click on
"Organisation units" and drag it to the row list in order to position
the organisation unit dimension as table rows. Note that indicators,
data elements and data set reporting rates are part of the common "Data"
dimension and will be displayed together in the pivot table. For
instance, after selecting indicators and data elements in the left menu,
you can drag "Organisation Unit" from the available dimensions list to
the row dimension list in order to arrange them as rows in the pivot
table.


![](resources/images/pivot_table/table_layout.png)

After you have set up your pivot table you can click "Update" to render
your pivot table, or click "Hide" to hide the layout screen without any
changes taking effect. Since we in our example have selected both the
period and organisation unit dimension as rows, the pivot table will
generate all combinations of the items in these dimensions and produce a
table like this:

![](resources/images/pivot_table/pivot_rows.png)

## Alterar a exibição de sua tabela dinâmica { #pivot_change_display } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Pivot Table **.

2.  Crie uma nova tabela dinâmica ou abra uma favorita.

3.  Clique em ** Opções **.

4.  Defina as opções conforme necessário.



    Table: Pivot table options

    || Option | Description |
    |---|---|---|
    | **Data** | **Show column totals**<br>     <br>**Show row totals** | Displays total values in the table for each row and column, as well as a total for all values in the table. |
    || **Show column sub-totals**<br>     <br>**Show row sub-totals** | Displays subtotals in the table for each dimension.<br>     <br>If you only select one dimension, subtotals will be hidden for those columns or rows. This is because the values will be equal to the subtotals. |
    || **Show dimension labels** | Shows the dimension names as part of the pivot tables. |
    || **Hide empty rows** | Hides empty rows from the table. This is useful when you look at large tables where a big part of the dimension items don't have data in order to keep the table more readable. |
    || **Hide empty columns** | Hides empty columns from the table. This is useful when you look at large tables where a big part of the dimension items don't have data in order to keep the table more readable. |
    || **Skip rounding** | Skips the rounding of data values, offering the full precision of data values. Can be useful for finance data where the full dollar amount is required. |
    || **Aggregation type** | The default aggregation operator can be over-ridden here, by selecting a different aggregation operator. Some of the aggregation types are **Count**, **Min** and **Max**. |
    || **Number type** | Sets the type of value you want to display in the pivot table: **Value**, **Percentage of row** or **Percentage of column**.<br>     <br>The options **Percentage of row** and**Percentage of column** mean that you'll display values as percentages of row total or percentage of column total instead of the aggregated value. This is useful when you want to see the contribution of data elements, categories or organisation units to the total value. |
    || **Measure criteria** | Allows for the data to be filtered on the server side.<br>     <br>You can instruct the system to return only records where the aggregated data value is equal, greater than, greater or equal, less than or less or equal to certain values.<br>     <br>If both parts of the filter are used, it's possible to filter out a range of data records. |
    | **Events** | **Include only completed events** | Includes only completed events in the aggregation process. This is useful for example to exclude partial events in indicator calculations. |
    | **Organisation units** | **Show hierarchy** | Shows the name of all ancestors for organisation units, for example "Sierra Leone / Bombali / Tamabaka / Sanya CHP" for Sanya CHP.<br>     <br>The organisation units are then sorted alphabetically which will order the organisation units according to the hierarchy.<br>     <br>When you download a pivot table with organisation units as rows and you've selected **Show hierarchy**, each organisation unit level is rendered as a separate column. This is useful for example when you create Excel pivot tables on a local computer. |
    | **Legend** | **Apply legend** | Applies a legend to the values. This mean that you can apply a colour to the values.<br>     <br>Select **By data item** to color the table cells individually according to each data element or indicator.<br>     <br>You configure legends in the **Maintenance** app. |
    || **Style** | Colors the text or background of cells in pivot tables based on the selected legend.<br>     <br>You can use this option for scorecards to identify high and low values at a glance. |
    | **Style** | **Display density** | Controls the size of the cells in the table. You can set it to **Comfortable**, **Normal** or **Compact**.<br>     <br>**Compact** is useful when you want to fit large tables into the browser screen. |
    || **Font size** | Controls the size of the table text font. You can set it to **Large**, **Normal** or **Small**. |
    || **Digit group separator** | Controls which character to separate groups of digits or "thousands". You can set it to **Comma**, **Space** or **None**. |
    | **General** | **Table title** | Type a title here to display it above the table. |
    | **Parameters (for standard reports only)** |     **Note** <br>    You create standard reports in the **Reports** app. <br>    In the **Pivot Table** app you set which parameters the system should prompt the user for. ||
    || **Reporting period** | Controls whether to ask user to enter a report period. |
    || **Organisation unit** | Controls whether to ask user to enter an organisation unit. |
    || **Parent organisation unit** | Controls whether to ask user to enter a parent organisation unit. |
    || **Include regression** | Includes a column with regression values to the pivot table. |
    || **Include cumulative** | Includes a column with cumulative values to the pivot table. |
    || **Sort order** | Controls the sort order of the values. |
    || **Top limit** | Controls the maximum number of rows to include in the pivot table. |

5.  Clique em ** Actualizar **.

## Gerenciar favoritos { #manage-favorites } 

Saving your charts or pivot tables as favorites makes it easy to find
them later. You can also choose to share them with other users as an
interpretation or display them on the dashboard.

You view the details and interpretations of your favorites in the
**Pivot Table**, **Data Visualizer**, **Event Visualizer**, **Event
Reports** apps. Use the **Favorites** menu to manage your favorites.

### Abra um favorito { #open-a-favorite } 

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Abrir **.

2.  Enter the name of a favorite in the search field, or click **Prev**
    and **Next** to display favorites.

3.  Clique no nome do favorito que deseja abrir.

### Salvar um favorito { #save-a-favorite } 

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Salvar como **.

2.  Insira um ** Nome ** e uma ** Descrição ** para seu favorito. O campo de descrição oferece suporte a um formato de rich text, consulte a seção de interpretações para obter mais detalhes.

3.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Renomear um favorito { #rename-a-favorite } 

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Renomear **.

2.  Digite o novo nome do seu favorito.

3.  Clique em ** Actualizar **.

### Escreva uma interpretação para um favorito { #write-an-interpretation-for-a-favorite } 

An interpretation is a link to a resource with a description of the data
at a given period. This information is visible in the **Dashboard** app.
To create an interpretation, you first need to create a favorite. If
you've shared your favorite with other people, the interpretation you
write is visible to those people.

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Interpretação de gravação **.

2.  In the text field, type a comment, question or interpretation. You
    can also mention other users with '@username'. Start by typing '@'
    plus the first letters of the username or real name and a mentioning
    bar will display the available users. Mentioned users will receive
    an internal DHIS2 message with the interpretation or comment. You
    can see the interpretation in the **Dashboard** app.

    It is possible to format the text with **bold**, *italic* by using the
    Markdown style markers \* and \_ for **bold** and *italic* respectively.
    Keyboard shortcuts are also available: Ctrl/Cmd + B and Ctrl/Cmd + I. A
    limited set of smilies is supported and can be used by typing one of the
    following character combinations: :) :-) :( :-( :+1 :-1. URLs are
    automatically detected and converted into a clickable link.

3.  Search for a user group that you want to share your favorite with,
    then click the **+** icon.

4.  Altere as configurações de compartilhamento para os grupos de usuários que deseja modificar.

      - **Pode editar e visualizar**: todos podem visualizar e editar o objeto.

      - **Pode visualizar apenas**: Todos podem visualizar o objeto.

      - **None**: The public won't have access to the object. This
        setting is only applicable to **Public access**.

5.  Clique em ** Compartilhar **.

### Inscreva-se em um favorito { #subscribe-to-a-favorite } 

When you are subscribed to a favorite, you receive internal messages
whenever another user likes/creates/updates an interpretation or
creates/update an interpretation comment of this favorite.

1.  Abra um favorito.

2.  Clique em ** \> \> \> ** no canto superior direito da área de trabalho.

3.  Clique no ícone de sino superior direito para se inscrever neste favorito.

### Crie um link para um favorito { #create-a-link-to-a-favorite } 

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Obter link **.

2.  Selecione um dos seguintes:

      - **Open in this app**: You get a URL for the favorite which you
        can share with other users by email or chat.

      - **Open in web api**: You get a URL of the API resource. By
        default this is an HTML resource, but you can change the file
        extension to ".json" or ".csv".

### Excluir um favorito { #delete-a-favorite } 

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Excluir **.

2.  Clique **OK**.

### Veja as interpretações com base em períodos relativos { #view-interpretations-based-on-relative-periods } 

Para ver as interpretações de períodos relativos, como um ano atrás:

1.  Abra um favorito com interpretações.

2.  Clique em ** \> \> \> ** no canto superior direito da área de trabalho.

3.  Click an interpretation. Your chart displays the data and the date
    based on when the interpretation was created.To view other
    interpretations, click them.

## Baixar dados de uma tabela dinâmica { #pivot_download_data } 

### Baixar formato de dados de layout de tabela { #download-table-layout-data-format } 

Para fazer download dos dados na tabela dinâmica atual:

1.  Clique em ** Download **.

2.  Under **Table layout**, click the format you want to download:
    Microsoft Excel, CSV or HTML.

    The data table will have one column per dimension and contain names
    of the dimension items.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > When you download a pivot table with organisation units as rows
    > and you've selected **Show hierarchy** in **Table options**, each
    > organisation unit level is rendered as a separate column. This is
    > useful for example when you create Excel pivot tables on a local
    > computer.

> **Tip**
>
> You can create a pivot table in Microsoft Excel from the downloaded
> Excel file.

### Baixe o formato de fonte de dados simples { #download-plain-data-source-format } 

You can download data in the current pivot table in JSON, XML, Excel,
and CSV as plain data formats with different identification schemes (ID,
Code, and Name). The data document uses identifiers of the dimension
items and opens in a new browser window to display the URL of the
request to the Web API in the address bar. This is useful for developers
of apps and other client modules based on the DHIS2 Web API or for those
who require a plan data source, for instance for import into statistical
packages.

Para baixar formatos de fonte de dados simples:

1.  Clique em ** Download **.

2.  Em ** Fonte de dados simples **, clique no formato que deseja baixar.



    Table: Available formats

    | Format | Action | Description |
    |---|---|---|
    | JSON | Click **JSON** | Downloads JSON format based on ID property.<br>     <br>You can also download JSON format based on **Code** or **Name** property. |
    | XML | Click **XML** | Downloads XML format based on ID property.<br>     <br>You can also download XML format based on **Code** or **Name** property. |
    | Microsoft Excel | Click **Microsoft Excel** | Downloads XML format based on ID property.<br>     <br>You can also download Microsoft Excel format based on **Code** or **Name** property. |
    | CSV | Click **CSV** | Downloads CSV format based on ID property.<br>     <br>You can also download CSV format based on **Code** or **Name** property. |
    | JRXML | Put the cursor on **Advanced** and click **JRXML** | Produces a template of a Jasper Report which can be further customized based on your exact needs and used as the basis for a standard report in DHIS2. |
    | Raw data SQL | Put the cursor on **Advanced** and click **Raw data SQL** | Provides the actual SQL statement used to generate the pivot table. You can use it as a data source in a Jasper report, or as the basis for an SQL view. |

### Baixe um formato CSV sem renderizar dados no navegador da web { #download-a-csv-format-without-rendering-data-in-the-web-browser } 

You can download data in CSV format directly without rendering the data
in the web browser. This helps to reduce any constraints in the system
settings that has been set with regards to the maximum number of
analytic records. This lets you download much larger batches of data
that you can use for later offline analysis.

To download data in CSV format without first rendering data in the web
browser:

1.  Clique na seta ao lado de ** Atualizar **.

    ![](resources/images/pivot_table/data_dump.png)

2.  Clique em ** CSV ** para baixar o formato baseado na propriedade ID.

    O arquivo é baixado para o seu computador.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > You can also download CSV format based on **Code** or **Name**
    > property.

## Incorporar uma tabela dinâmica em uma página da web externa { #pivot_embed } 

Certain analysis-related resources in DHIS2, like pivot tables, charts
and maps, can be embedded in any web page by using a plug-in. You will
find more information about the plug-ins in the Web API chapter in the
*DHIS2 Developer Manual*.

To generate a HTML fragment that you can use to display the pivot table
in an external web page:

1.  Clique em ** Incorporar **.

2.  Clique em ** Selecionar ** para destacar o fragmento HTML.

## Visualize os dados da tabela dinâmica como um gráfico ou mapa { #pivot_integration } 

When you have made a pivot table you can switch between pivot table,
chart and map visualization of your data.

### Abra uma tabela dinâmica como um gráfico { #open-a-pivot-table-as-a-chart } 

1.  Clique em ** Gráfico ** \> ** Abrir esta tabela como gráfico **.

    Sua tabela dinâmica atual é aberta como um gráfico.


![](resources/images/pivot_table/pivot_integration.png)

### Abra uma seleção de tabela dinâmica como um gráfico { #open-a-pivot-table-selection-as-a-chart } 

If you want to visualize a small part of your pivot table as a chart you
can click directly on a value in the table instead opening the whole
table.

1.  Na tabela dinâmica, clique em um valor.


    ![](resources/images/pivot_table/pivot_integration_table.png)

2.  To verify the selection, hold the cursor over **Open selection as
    chart**. The highlighted dimension headers in the table indicate
    what data will be visualized as a chart.

3.  Clique em ** Abrir seleção como gráfico **.

### Abra uma tabela dinâmica como um mapa { #open-a-pivot-table-as-a-map } 

1.  Clique em ** Chart ** \> ** Open this table as map **

    Sua tabela dinâmica atual é aberta como um mapa.

### Abra uma seleção de tabela dinâmica como um mapa { #open-a-pivot-table-selection-as-a-map } 

1.  Na tabela dinâmica, clique em um valor.

    Um menu é exibido.

2.  Clique em ** Abrir seleção como mapa **.

    Sua seleção é aberta como um mapa.



# Usando o aplicativo Relatórios de eventos { #event_reports_app } 

## Sobre o aplicativo Relatórios de Eventos { #event_reports_about } 


![](resources/images/event_report/event_report.png)

With the **Event Reports** app you can analyse events in two types of
reports:

  - Aggregated event reports: Pivot table-style analysis with aggregated
    numbers of events

    By selecting **Aggregated values** from the top-left menu you can
    use the **Event Reports** app to create pivot tables with aggregated
    numbers of events. An event report is always based on a program. You
    can do analysis based on a range of dimensions. Each dimension can
    have a corresponding filter. Dimensions can be selected from the
    left-side menu. Similar to the pivot tables app, aggregated event
    reports may be limited by the amount of RAM accessible by the
    browser. If your requested table exceeds a set size, you will
    recieve a warning prompt asking whether or not you want to continue.

  - Relatórios de eventos individuais: listas de eventos

    By selecting **Events** from the top-left menu you can use the
    **Event Reports** app to make searches or queries for events based
    on a flexible set of criteria. The report will be displayed as a
    table with one row per event. Each dimension can be used as a column
    in the table or as a filter. Each dimension can have a criteria
    (filter). Data elements of type option set allows for "in" criteria,
    where multiple options can be selected. Numeric values can be
    compared to filter values using greater than, equal or less than
    operators.

## Crie um relatório de evento { #event_reports_create } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Relatórios de eventos **.

2.  Selecione ** Valores agregados ** ou ** Eventos **.

3.  No menu à esquerda, selecione os metadados que deseja analisar.

4.  Clique em ** Layout ** e organize as dimensões.

    Você pode manter a seleção padrão, se desejar.

5.  Clique em ** Actualizar **.

## Selecione os itens de dimensão { #event_reports_select_dimensions } 

An event report is always based on a program and you can do analysis
based on a range of dimensions. For programs with category combinations,
you can use program categories and category option group sets as
dimensions for tables and charts. Each dimension item can have a
corresponding filter.

1.  Selecione os elementos de dados:

    1.  Clique em ** Dados **.

    2.  Selecione um programa e uma fase do programa.

        The data elements associated with the selected program are
        listed under **Available**. Each data element acts as a
        dimension.

    3.  Select the data elements you need by double-clicking their
        names.

        Data elements can be filtered by type (Data elements, Program
        attributes, Program indicators) and are prefixed to make them
        easily recognizable.

        After selecting a data element, it is visible under **Selected
        data items**.

    4.  (Optional) For each data element, specify a filter with
        operators such as "greater than", "in" or "equal" together with
        a filter value.

2.  Selecione os períodos.

    1.  Clique em ** Períodos **.

    2.  Selecione um ou vários períodos.

        You have three period options: relative periods, fixed periods
        and start/end dates. You can combine fixed periods and relative
        periods in the same chart. You cannot combine fixed periods and
        relative periods with start/end dates in the same chart.
        Overlapping periods are filtered so that they only appear once.

          - Fixed periods: In the **Select period type** box, select a
            period type. You can select any number of fixed periods from
            any period type. Fixed periods can for example be "January
            2014".

          - Relative periods: In the lower part of the **Periods**
            section, select as many relative periods as you like. The
            names are relative to the current date. This means that if
            the current month is March and you select **Last month**,
            the month of February is included in the chart. Relative
            periods has the advantage that it keeps the data in the
            report up to date as time goes.

          - Start/end dates: In the list under the **Periods** tab,
            select **Start/end dates**. This period type lets you
            specify flexible dates for the time span in the report.

3.  Selecione unidades de organização.

    1.  Clique em ** Unidades organizacionais **.

    2.  Clique no ícone da caixa de engrenagens.

    3.  Selecione um ** Modo de seleção ** e uma unidade organizacional.

        Existem três modos de seleção diferentes:



        Table: Selection modes

        | Selection mode | Description |
        |---|---|
        | **Select organisation units** | Lets you select the organisation units you want to appear in the chart from the organization tree.<br>         <br>Select **User org unit** to disable the organisation unit tree and only select the organisation unit that is related to your profile.<br>         <br>Select **User sub-units** to disable the organisation unit tree and only select the sub-units of the organisation unit that is related to your profile.<br>         <br>Select **User sub-x2-units** to disable the organisation unit tree and only select organisation units two levels down from the organisation unit that is related to your profile.<br>         <br>This functionality is useful for administrators to create a meaningful "system" favorite. With this option checked all users find their respective organisation unit when they open the favorite. |
        | **Select levels** | Lets you select all organisation units at one or more levels, for example national or district level.<br>         <br>You can also select the parent organisation unit in the tree, which makes it easy to select for example, all facilities inside one or more districts. |
        | **Select groups** | Lets you select all organisation units inside one or several groups and parent organisation units at the same time, for example hospitals or chiefdoms. |

4.  Clique em ** Actualizar **.

## Selecione série, categoria e filtro { #event_reports_select_series_category_filter } 

You can define which data dimension you want to appear as columns, rows
and filters in the pivot table. Each data element appears as individual
dimensions and can be placed on any of the axes.

> **Note**
>
> Data elements of continuous value types (real numbers/decimal numbers)
> can only be used as filters, and will automatically be positioned as
> filters in the layout dialog. The reason for this is that continuous
> number cannot be grouped into sensible ranges and used on columns and
> rows.

1.  Clique em ** Layout **.

2.  Arraste e solte as dimensões no espaço apropriado.

3.  Clique em ** Actualizar **.

## Mude a exibição de sua mesa { #event_reports_change_display } 

Você pode personalizar a exibição de um relatório de evento.

1.  Clique em ** Opções **.

2.  Set the options as required. Available options are different between
    aggregated event reports and individual event reports.



    Table: Event reports options

    || Option | Description | Available for report type |
    |---|---|---|---|
    | **Data** | **Show column totals** | Displays totals at the end of each column in the pivot table. | Aggregated event report |
    || **Show column sub-totals** | Displays sub-totals for each column in the pivot table. | Aggregated event report |
    || **Show row totals** | Displays totals at the end of each row in the pivot table. | Aggregated event report |
    || **Show row sub-totals** | Displays sub-totals for each row in the pivot table. | Aggregated event report |
    || **Show dimension labels** | Displays labels for dimensions. | Aggregated event report |
    || **Hide empty rows** | Hides empty rows in the pivot table. | Aggregated event report |
    || **Hide n/a data** | Hides data tagged as N/A from the chart. | Aggregated event report |
    || **Include only completed events** | Includes only completed events in the aggregation process. This is useful when you want for example to exclude partial events in indicator calculations. | Aggregated event report<br>     <br>Individual event report |
    || **Limit** | Sets a limit of the maximum number of rows that you can display in the table, combined with a setting for showing top or bottom values. | Aggregated event report |
    || **Output type** | Defines the output type. The output types are **Event**, **Enrollment** and **Tracked entity instance**. | Aggregated event report |
    || **Program status** | Filters data based on the program status: **All**, **Active**, **Completed** or **Cancelled**. | Aggregated event report |
    || **Event status** | Filters data based on the event status: **All**, **Active**, **Completed**, **Scheduled**, **Overdue** or **Skipped**. | Aggregated event report |
    | **Organisation units** | **Show hierarchy** | Includes the names of all parents of each organisation unit in labels. | Aggregated event report |
    | **Style** | **Display density** | Controls the size of the cells in the table. You can set it to **Comfortable**, **Normal** or **Compact**.<br>     <br>**Compact** is useful when you want to fit large tables into the browser screen. | Aggregated event report<br>     <br>Individual event report |
    || **Font size** | Controls the size of the table text font. You can set it to **Large**, **Normal** or **Small**. | Aggregated event report<br>     <br>Individual event report |
    || **Digit group separator** | Controls which character to separate groups of digits or "thousands". You can set it to **Comma**, **Space** or **None**. | Aggregated event report<br>     <br>Individual event report |

3.  Clique em ** Actualizar **.

## Baixar fonte de dados do gráfico { #event_reports_download_report } 

You can download the data source behind an event report in HTML, JSON,
XML, Microsoft Excel or CSV formats.

1.  Clique em ** Download **.

2.  Em ** Fonte de dados simples **, clique no formato que deseja baixar.



    Table: Available formats

    | Format | Description |
    |---|---|
    | HTML | Creates HTML table based on selected meta data |
    | JSON | Downloads data values in JSON format based on selected meta data |
    | XML | Downloads data values in XML format based on selected meta data |
    | Microsoft Excel | Downloads data values in Microsoft Excel format based on selected meta data |
    | CSV | Downloads data values in CSV format based on selected meta data |

## Gerenciar favoritos { #manage-favorites } 

Saving your charts or pivot tables as favorites makes it easy to find
them later. You can also choose to share them with other users as an
interpretation or display them on the dashboard.

You view the details and interpretations of your favorites in the
**Pivot Table**, **Data Visualizer**, **Event Visualizer**, **Event
Reports** apps. Use the **Favorites** menu to manage your favorites.

### Abra um favorito { #open-a-favorite } 

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Abrir **.

2.  Enter the name of a favorite in the search field, or click **Prev**
    and **Next** to display favorites.

3.  Clique no nome do favorito que deseja abrir.

### Salvar um favorito { #save-a-favorite } 

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Salvar como **.

2.  Insira um ** Nome ** e uma ** Descrição ** para seu favorito. O campo de descrição oferece suporte a um formato de rich text, consulte a seção de interpretações para obter mais detalhes.

3.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Renomear um favorito { #rename-a-favorite } 

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Renomear **.

2.  Digite o novo nome do seu favorito.

3.  Clique em ** Actualizar **.

### Escreva uma interpretação para um favorito { #write-an-interpretation-for-a-favorite } 

An interpretation is a link to a resource with a description of the data
at a given period. This information is visible in the **Dashboard** app.
To create an interpretation, you first need to create a favorite. If
you've shared your favorite with other people, the interpretation you
write is visible to those people.

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Interpretação de gravação **.

2.  In the text field, type a comment, question or interpretation. You
    can also mention other users with '@username'. Start by typing '@'
    plus the first letters of the username or real name and a mentioning
    bar will display the available users. Mentioned users will receive
    an internal DHIS2 message with the interpretation or comment. You
    can see the interpretation in the **Dashboard** app.

    It is possible to format the text with **bold**, *italic* by using the
    Markdown style markers \* and \_ for **bold** and *italic* respectively.
    Keyboard shortcuts are also available: Ctrl/Cmd + B and Ctrl/Cmd + I. A
    limited set of smilies is supported and can be used by typing one of the
    following character combinations: :) :-) :( :-( :+1 :-1. URLs are
    automatically detected and converted into a clickable link.

3.  Search for a user group that you want to share your favorite with,
    then click the **+** icon.

4.  Altere as configurações de compartilhamento para os grupos de usuários que deseja modificar.

      - **Pode editar e visualizar**: todos podem visualizar e editar o objeto.

      - **Pode visualizar apenas**: Todos podem visualizar o objeto.

      - **None**: The public won't have access to the object. This
        setting is only applicable to **Public access**.

5.  Clique em ** Compartilhar **.

### Inscreva-se em um favorito { #subscribe-to-a-favorite } 

When you are subscribed to a favorite, you receive internal messages
whenever another user likes/creates/updates an interpretation or
creates/update an interpretation comment of this favorite.

1.  Abra um favorito.

2.  Clique em ** \> \> \> ** no canto superior direito da área de trabalho.

3.  Clique no ícone de sino superior direito para se inscrever neste favorito.

### Crie um link para um favorito { #create-a-link-to-a-favorite } 

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Obter link **.

2.  Selecione um dos seguintes:

      - **Open in this app**: You get a URL for the favorite which you
        can share with other users by email or chat.

      - **Open in web api**: You get a URL of the API resource. By
        default this is an HTML resource, but you can change the file
        extension to ".json" or ".csv".

### Excluir um favorito { #delete-a-favorite } 

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Excluir **.

2.  Clique **OK**.

### Veja as interpretações com base em períodos relativos { #view-interpretations-based-on-relative-periods } 

Para ver as interpretações de períodos relativos, como um ano atrás:

1.  Abra um favorito com interpretações.

2.  Clique em ** \> \> \> ** no canto superior direito da área de trabalho.

3.  Click an interpretation. Your chart displays the data and the date
    based on when the interpretation was created.To view other
    interpretations, click them.

## Visualize um relatório de evento como um gráfico { #event_reports_open_as_chart } 

Depois de fazer um relatório de evento, você pode abri-lo como um gráfico:

Clique em ** Gráfico ** \> ** Abrir este gráfico como tabela **.



# Usando o aplicativo Event Visualizer { #event_visualizer_app } 

## Sobre o aplicativo Event Visualizer { #about-the-event-visualizer-app } 


![](resources/images/event_visualizer/event_visualizer.png)

With the **Event Visualizer** app, you can create charts based on event
data.

## Crie um gráfico { #create-a-chart } 

1.  Open the **Event Visualizer** app and select a chart type.

2.  No menu à esquerda, selecione os metadados que deseja analisar.

3.  Clique em ** Layout ** e organize as dimensões.

    Você pode manter a seleção padrão, se desejar.

4.  Clique em ** Actualizar **.

## Selecione um tipo de gráfico { #select-a-chart-type } 

The **Event Visualizer** app has eight different chart types, each with
different characteristics. To select a chart type:

1.  Em ** Tipo de gráfico **, clique no tipo de gráfico de que você precisa.



    Table: Chart types

    | Chart type | Description |
    |---|---|
    | Column chart | Displays information as vertical rectangular columns with lengths proportional to the values they represent.<br>     <br>Useful when you want to, for example, compare performance of different districts. |
    | Stacked column chart | Displays information as vertical rectangular columns, where bars representing multiple categories are stacked on top of each other.<br>     <br>Useful when you want to, for example, display trends or sums of related data elements. |
    | Bar chart | Same as column chart, only with horizontal bars. |
    | Stacked bar chart | Same as stacked column chart, only with horizontal bars. |
    | Line chart | Displays information as a series of points connected by straight lines. Also referred to as time series.<br>     <br>Useful when you want to, for example, visualize trends in indicator data over multiple time periods. |
    | Area chart | Is based on line chart, with the space between the axis and the line filled with colors and the lines stacked on top of each other.<br>     <br>Useful when you want to compare the trends of related indicators. |
    | Pie chart | Circular chart divided into sectors (or slices).<br>     <br>Useful when you want to, for example, visualize the proportion of data for individual data elements compared to the total sum of all data elements in the chart. |
    | Radar chart | Displays data on axes starting from the same point. Also known as spider chart. |

2.  Clique em ** Actualizar **.

## Selecione os itens de dimensão { #event_visualizer_select_dimensions } 

An event chart is always based on a program and you can do analysis
based on a range of dimensions. For programs with category combinations,
you can use program categories and category option group sets as
dimensions for tables and charts. Each dimension item can have a
corresponding filter. You select dimension items from the left-side
menu.

1.  Selecione os elementos de dados:

    1.  Clique em ** Dados **.

    2.  Selecione um programa e uma fase do programa.

        The data elements associated with the selected program are
        listed under **Available**. Each data element acts as a
        dimension.

    3.  Select the data elements you need by double-clicking their
        names.

        Data elements can be filtered by type (Data elements, Program
        attributes, Program indicators) and are prefixed to make them
        easily recognizable.

        After selecting a data element, it is visible under **Selected
        data items**.

    4.  (Optional) For each data element, specify a filter with
        operators such as "greater than", "in" or "equal" together with
        a filter value.

2.  Selecione os períodos.

    1.  Clique em ** Períodos **.

    2.  Selecione um ou vários períodos.

        You have three period options: relative periods, fixed periods
        and start/end dates. You can combine fixed periods and relative
        periods in the same chart. You cannot combine fixed periods and
        relative periods with start/end dates in the same chart.
        Overlapping periods are filtered so that they only appear once.

          - Fixed periods: In the **Select period type** box, select a
            period type. You can select any number of fixed periods from
            any period type. Fixed periods can for example be "January
            2014".

          - Relative periods: In the lower part of the **Periods**
            section, select as many relative periods as you like. The
            names are relative to the current date. This means that if
            the current month is March and you select **Last month**,
            the month of February is included in the chart. Relative
            periods has the advantage that it keeps the data in the
            report up to date as time goes.

          - Start/end dates: In the list under the **Periods** tab,
            select **Start/end dates**. This period type lets you
            specify flexible dates for the time span in the report.

3.  Selecione unidades de organização.

    1.  Clique em ** Unidades organizacionais **.

    2.  Clique no ícone da caixa de engrenagens.

    3.  Selecione um ** Modo de seleção ** e uma unidade organizacional.

        Existem três modos de seleção diferentes:



        Table: Selection modes

        | Selection mode | Description |
        |---|---|
        | **Select organisation units** | Lets you select the organisation units you want to appear in the chart from the organization tree.<br>         <br>Select **User org unit** to disable the organisation unit tree and only select the organisation unit that is related to your profile.<br>         <br>Select **User sub-units** to disable the organisation unit tree and only select the sub-units of the organisation unit that is related to your profile.<br>         <br>Select **User sub-x2-units** to disable the organisation unit tree and only select organisation units two levels down from the organisation unit that is related to your profile.<br>         <br>This functionality is useful for administrators to create a meaningful "system" favorite. With this option checked all users find their respective organisation unit when they open the favorite. |
        | **Select levels** | Lets you select all organisation units at one or more levels, for example national or district level.<br>         <br>You can also select the parent organisation unit in the tree, which makes it easy to select for example, all facilities inside one or more districts. |
        | **Select groups** | Lets you select all organisation units inside one or several groups and parent organisation units at the same time, for example hospitals or chiefdoms. |

4.  Clique em ** Actualizar **.

## Selecione série, categoria e filtro { #select-series-category-and-filter } 

You can define which data dimension you want to appear as series,
category and filter. Each data element appears as individual dimensions
and can be placed on any of the axes. Series and category panels can
only have one dimension at the time.

> **Note**
> 
> Data elements of continuous value types (real numbers/decimal numbers)
> can only be used as filters, and will automatically be positioned as
> filters in the layout dialog. The reason for this is that continuous
> number cannot be grouped into sensible ranges and used on columns and
> rows.

1.  Clique em ** Layout **.

2.  Drag and drop the dimensions to the appropriate space. Only one
    dimension can be in each section.

3.  Clique em ** Actualizar **.

## Alterar a exibição de seu gráfico { #event_visualizer_change_display } 

Você pode personalizar a exibição de um relatório de evento.

1.  Clique em ** Opções **.

2.  Defina as opções conforme necessário.



    Table: Chart options

    | Option | Description ||
    |---|---|---|
    | **Data** | **Show values** | Displays values as numbers on top of each series. |
    || **Use 100% stacked values** | Displays 100 % stacked values in column charts. |
    || **Use cumulative values** | Displays cumulative values in line charts. |
    || **Hide n/a data** | Hides data tagged as N/A from the chart. |
    || **Include only completed events** | Includes only completed events in the aggregation process. This is useful when you want for example to exclude partial events in indicator calculations. |
    || **Hide empty categories** | Hides the category items with no data from the chart.<br>     <br>**None**: doesn't hide any of the empty categories<br>     <br>**Before first**: hides missing values only before the first value<br>     <br>**After last**: hides missing values only after the last value<br>     <br>**Before first and after last**: hides missing values only before the first value and after the last value<br>     <br>**All**: hides all missing values<br>     <br>This is useful for example when you create column and bar charts. |
    || **Trend line** | Displays the trend line which visualizes how your data evolves over time. For example if performance is improving or deteriorating. Useful when periods are selected as category. |
    || **Target line value/title** | Displays a horizontal line and title (optional) at the given domain value. Useful for example when you want to compare your performance to the current target. |
    || **Base line value/title** | Displays a horizontal line and title (optional) at the given domain value. Useful for example when you want to visualize how your performance has evolved since the beginning of a process. |
    || **Sort order** | Allows you to sort the values on your chart from either low to high or high to low. |
    || **Output type** | Defines the output type. The output types are **Event**, **Enrollment** and**Tracked entity instance**. |
    || **Program status** | Filters data based on the program status: **All**, **Active**, **Completed** or **Cancelled**. |
    || **Event status** | Filters data based on the event status: **All**, **Active**, **Completed**, **Scheduled**, **Overdue** or **Skipped**. |
    | **Axes** | **Range axis min/max** | Defines the maximum and minimum value which will be visible on the range axis. |
    || **Range axis tick steps** | Defines the number of ticks which will be visible on the range axis. |
    || **Range axis decimals** | Defines the number of decimals which will be used for range axis values. |
    || **Range axis title** | Type a title here to display a label next to the range axis (also referred to as the Y axis). Useful when you want to give context information to the chart, for example about the unit of measure. |
    || **Domain axis title** | Type a title here to display a label below the domain axis (also referred to as the X axis). Useful when you want to give context information to the chart, for example about the period type. |
    | **General** | **Hide chart legend** | Hides the legend and leaves more room for the chart itself. |
    || **Hide chart title** | Hides the title (default or custom) of your chart. |
    || **Chart title** | Type a title here to display a custom title above the chart. If you don't enter a title, the default title is displayed. |
    || **Hide chart subtitle** | Hides the subtitle of your chart. |
    || **Chart subtitle** | Type a subtitle here to display a custom subtitle above the chart but below the title. If you don't enter a subtitle, no subtitle is displayed in the chart. |

3.  Clique em ** Actualizar **.

## Baixe um gráfico como imagem ou PDF { #download-a-chart-as-an-image-or-a-pdf } 

After you have created a chart you can download it to your local
computer as an image or PDF file.

1.  Clique em ** Download **.

2.  Em ** Gráficos **, clique em ** PNG (.png) ** ou ** PDF (.pdf) **.

    The file is automatically downloaded to your computer. Now you can
    for example embed the image file into a text document as part of a
    report.

## Baixar fonte de dados do gráfico { #download-chart-data-source } 

You can download the data source behind a chart in HTML, JSON, XML,
Microsoft Excel or CSV formats. The data document uses identifiers of
the dimension items and opens in a new browser window to display the URL
of the request to the Web API in the address bar. This is useful for
developers of apps and other client modules based on the DHIS2 Web API
or for those who require a plan data source, for instance for import
into statistical packages.

Para baixar formatos de fonte de dados simples:

1.  Clique em ** Download **.

2.  Em ** Fonte de dados simples **, clique no formato que deseja baixar.



    Table: Available formats

    | Format | Description |
    |---|---|
    | HTML | Creates HTML table based on selected meta data |
    | JSON | Downloads data values in JSON format based on selected meta data |
    | XML | Downloads data values in XML format based on selected meta data |
    | Microsoft Excel | Downloads data values in Microsoft Excel format based on selected meta data |
    | CSV | Downloads data values in CSV format based on selected meta data |

## Gerenciar favoritos { #manage-favorites } 

Saving your charts or pivot tables as favorites makes it easy to find
them later. You can also choose to share them with other users as an
interpretation or display them on the dashboard.

You view the details and interpretations of your favorites in the
**Pivot Table**, **Data Visualizer**, **Event Visualizer**, **Event
Reports** apps. Use the **Favorites** menu to manage your favorites.

### Abra um favorito { #open-a-favorite } 

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Abrir **.

2.  Enter the name of a favorite in the search field, or click **Prev**
    and **Next** to display favorites.

3.  Clique no nome do favorito que deseja abrir.

### Salvar um favorito { #save-a-favorite } 

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Salvar como **.

2.  Insira um ** Nome ** e uma ** Descrição ** para seu favorito. O campo de descrição oferece suporte a um formato de rich text, consulte a seção de interpretações para obter mais detalhes.

3.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Renomear um favorito { #rename-a-favorite } 

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Renomear **.

2.  Digite o novo nome do seu favorito.

3.  Clique em ** Actualizar **.

### Escreva uma interpretação para um favorito { #write-an-interpretation-for-a-favorite } 

An interpretation is a link to a resource with a description of the data
at a given period. This information is visible in the **Dashboard** app.
To create an interpretation, you first need to create a favorite. If
you've shared your favorite with other people, the interpretation you
write is visible to those people.

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Interpretação de gravação **.

2.  In the text field, type a comment, question or interpretation. You
    can also mention other users with '@username'. Start by typing '@'
    plus the first letters of the username or real name and a mentioning
    bar will display the available users. Mentioned users will receive
    an internal DHIS2 message with the interpretation or comment. You
    can see the interpretation in the **Dashboard** app.

    It is possible to format the text with **bold**, *italic* by using the
    Markdown style markers \* and \_ for **bold** and *italic* respectively.
    Keyboard shortcuts are also available: Ctrl/Cmd + B and Ctrl/Cmd + I. A
    limited set of smilies is supported and can be used by typing one of the
    following character combinations: :) :-) :( :-( :+1 :-1. URLs are
    automatically detected and converted into a clickable link.

3.  Search for a user group that you want to share your favorite with,
    then click the **+** icon.

4.  Altere as configurações de compartilhamento para os grupos de usuários que deseja modificar.

      - **Pode editar e visualizar**: todos podem visualizar e editar o objeto.

      - **Pode visualizar apenas**: Todos podem visualizar o objeto.

      - **None**: The public won't have access to the object. This
        setting is only applicable to **Public access**.

5.  Clique em ** Compartilhar **.

### Inscreva-se em um favorito { #subscribe-to-a-favorite } 

When you are subscribed to a favorite, you receive internal messages
whenever another user likes/creates/updates an interpretation or
creates/update an interpretation comment of this favorite.

1.  Abra um favorito.

2.  Clique em ** \> \> \> ** no canto superior direito da área de trabalho.

3.  Clique no ícone de sino superior direito para se inscrever neste favorito.

### Crie um link para um favorito { #create-a-link-to-a-favorite } 

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Obter link **.

2.  Selecione um dos seguintes:

      - **Open in this app**: You get a URL for the favorite which you
        can share with other users by email or chat.

      - **Open in web api**: You get a URL of the API resource. By
        default this is an HTML resource, but you can change the file
        extension to ".json" or ".csv".

### Excluir um favorito { #delete-a-favorite } 

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Excluir **.

2.  Clique **OK**.

### Veja as interpretações com base em períodos relativos { #view-interpretations-based-on-relative-periods } 

Para ver as interpretações de períodos relativos, como um ano atrás:

1.  Abra um favorito com interpretações.

2.  Clique em ** \> \> \> ** no canto superior direito da área de trabalho.

3.  Click an interpretation. Your chart displays the data and the date
    based on when the interpretation was created.To view other
    interpretations, click them.

## Visualize um gráfico como uma tabela dinâmica { #visualize-a-chart-as-a-pivot-table } 

Depois de criar um gráfico, você pode abri-lo como uma tabela dinâmica:

Clique em ** Gráfico ** \> ** Abrir este gráfico como tabela **.




# Funcionalidade de relatórios no aplicativo de relatórios { #using_the_reports_app } 

O aplicativo de relatórios permite relatórios prontos, relatórios padrão, relatórios de conjuntos de dados, recursos e relatórios de distribuição de unidades organizacionais.

## Usando relatórios padrão { #standard_reports_in_the_beta_reports_app } 

You access the available reports by navigating to Apps-\>Reports. In the
report menu in the left bar, click Standard Report. A list of all
pre-defined reports will appear in the main window.


![](resources/images/dhis2UserManual/react_reports_app_standard_reports.png)

You run/view a report by clicking on the triple-dot icon of the report and then
selecting "Create" from the contextual menu. If there are any
pre-defined parameters, you will see a report parameter window where you
must fill in the values needed for orgunit and/or reporting month,
depending on what has been defined in the underlying report table(s).
Click on "Generate Report" when you are ready. The report will either appear
directly in your browser or be available as a PDF file for download,
depending on your browser settings for handling PDF files. You can save
the file and keep it locally on your computer for later use.

## Usando relatórios de conjunto de dados { #dataset_reports_in_the_beta_reports_app } 

Dataset reports are printer friendly views of the data entry screen
filled with either raw or aggregated data.

You can access data set reports from Apps-\>Reports.

A Criteria window will appear where you fill in the details for your
report:

** Conjunto de dados: ** o conjunto de dados que você deseja exibir.

**Report period:** The actual period you want data for. This can be
aggregated as well as raw periods. This means that you can ask for a
quarterly or annual report even though the data set is collected
monthly. A data set's period type (collection frequency) is defined in
data set maintenance. First select the period type (Monthly, Quarterly,
Yearly etc.) in the drop down next to Prev and Next buttons, and then
select one of the available periods from the dropdown list below. Use
Prev and Next to jump one year back or forward.

**Use data for selected unit only:** Use this option if you want a
report for an orgunit that has children, but only want the data
collected directly for this unit and not the data collected by its
children. If you want a typical aggregated report for an orgunit you do
not want to tick this option.

**Report Organisation unit:** Here you select the orgunit you want
the report for. This can be at any level in the hierarchy as the data
will be aggregated up to this level automatically (if you do not tick
the option above).

When you are done filling in the report criteria you click on
"Generate". The report will appear as HTML in a printer-friendly format.
Use the print and save as functions in the browser to print or save (as
HTML) the report.You can also export the data set report in Excel and
PDF formats.

## Usando o resumo da taxa de relatório { #reporting_rate_summary_in_the_beta_reports_app } 

Access the reporting rate summary from the Apps-\>Reports menu.
Reporting rate summaries will show how many datasets (forms) that have
been submitted by organisation unit and period.

The reporting rate is calculation is based on complete data set registrations.
A complete data set registration refers to a user marking a data entry form as
complete, typically by clicking the complete button in the data entry screen,
hereby indicating to the system that she considers the form to be
complete. This is i.e. a subjective approach to calculating
completeness.

O resumo da taxa de relatório, para cada linha, mostrará uma série de medidas:

  - Actual reports: Indicates the number of data entry complete
    registrations for the relevant data set.

  - Expected reports: Indicates how many data entry complete
    registrations are expected. This number is based on the number of
    organisation units the relevant data set has been assigned to
    (enabled for data entry).

  - Reporting rate: The percentage of reports registered as complete based on
    the number expected.

  - Reports on time: Same as actual reports, only reports registered as
    complete within the maximum number of days after the end of the
    reporting period. This number of days after reporting period can be
    defined per data set in the data set management.

  - Reporting rate on time: Same as percentage, only reports registered as
    complete on time used as numerator.

Para executar o relatório, você pode seguir estas etapas:

  - Selecione um orgunit da árvore.

  - Selecione um conjunto de dados.

  - Select a period type and a period from the list of available periods
    for that period type.

  - The report will then be rendered. Change any of the parameters above
    and click "Get report" again see the corresponding results.


![](resources/images/dhis2UserManual/react_reports_app_reporting_rate_summary.png)

## Usando recursos { #resources_in_the_beta_reports_app } 

The resource tool allows you to upload both files from your local
computer to the DHIS server and to add links to other resources on the
Internet through URLs. If cloud storage is configured for your system,
resources will be saved there.

Para criar um novo recurso:

1.  Open the **Reports** app and click **Resource**.

2.  Clique em ** Adicionar novo **.

3.  Insira um **nome**.

4.  Selecione um ** Tipo **: ** Carregar arquivo ** ou ** URL externo **.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

## Usando relatórios de distribuição de unidade organizacional { #orgunit_distribution_reports_in_the_beta_reports_app } 

You can access the Orgunit Distribution reports from the left side menu
in the Apps-\>Reports.

Orgunit distribution reports are reports that show how the orgunits are
distributed on various properties like type and ownership, and by
geographical areas.

O resultado pode ser apresentado em um relatório baseado em tabela ou em um gráfico.

** Executando um relatório: **

To run a report first select an orgunit in the upper left side orgunit
tree. The report will be based on orgunits located under the selected
orgunit. The select the orgunit group set that you want to use,
typically these are Type, Ownership, Rural/Urban, but can be any
user-defined orgunit group set. The you can click on either Get Report
to get the table-based presentation or Get chart to get the same result
in a chart. You can also download the table-based report as Excel or
CSV.


![](resources/images/dhis2UserManual/react_reports_app_org_unit_dist.png)



# Mensagens { #messages } 

## Sobre mensagens e comentários { #about-messages-and-feedback-messages } 

![](resources/images/messaging/view_inbox.png)

Within DHIS2 you can send messages and feedback messages to users, user
groups and organisation units. When you send a feedback message, it is
routed to a particular user group called the feedback recipient group.
If you are a member of this user group, you have access to feedback
handling tools. You can, for example, set the status of an incoming
feedback to "Pending" while you are waiting for information.

In addition to the user-to-user and feedback messages, depending on your
configuration the system will also send you system-generated messages.
These messages could be triggered by different events, including system
or background job failures and validation analysis results. Feedback
handling tools are also available for validation results and the
priority will be set to the importance of the validation rule violated.

To visit the app click **message icon in header bar** or find the
**Messaging** app in the app search box.

> **Note**
>
> Messages and feedback messages are not sent to users' e-mail
> addresses, the messages only appear within DHIS2.
>
> With 2.30 we introduced a new messaging app which offers a richer
> messaging experience. Specifically:
>
>   - Switch between list view and compact view by clicking the icon in
>     the top right corner.
>     - The list view is simplistic and gives a good
>     overview of all messages and is especially suited for feedback and
>     validation messages.
>     - The compact view is a modern way of view
>     messages where the user has more information in one view, hence
>     viewing and replying several messages is easier.
>
>     The first screenshot in this section displays list view, while the
>     screenshot in section **Read a message** displays the compact
>     view.
>
>   - A new search field is added which enables the user to search for
>     messages. The search filters messages on different message
>     attributes; subject, text and senders. This implies that you are
>     able to narrow down the message conversation list by entering a
>     search.
>
>   - A auto refresh feature is added so that the app fetches new
>     messages at a set interval, every 5 minutes. This feature is
>     disabled by default.
>
>   - For every message conversation you are able to add participants to
>     the conversation. This is very useful if you want input on that
>     particular conversation or if someone should also see the
>     information. It is not possible to delete participants from a
>     conversation.

## Crie uma mensagem { #create-a-message } 

![](resources/images/messaging/create_private_message.png)

1.  Clique em ** Compose **.

2.  Define who you want to receive the message. You can send a message
    to organisation units, users and user groups.

      - In the **To** field you can search for organisation units, users
        and user groups and select the wished recipients.

3.  Digite um assunto e uma mensagem.

4.  Clique em ** Enviar **.

## Leia uma mensagem { #read-a-message } 

![](resources/images/messaging/read_message.png)

1.  Selecione o tipo de mensagem apropriado à esquerda.

2.  Clique em uma mensagem.

    If the message is part of a conversation, you will see all messages in
    this conversation.

## Crie uma mensagem de feedback { #create-a-feedback-message } 

1.  Follow the steps as for creating a message, only selecting
    **Feedback message** instead of entering recipients.

2.  The message will be created as a feedback message and will appear in
    all of the specified users' **Ticket** folder.

## Anexos { #attachments } 

With 2.31 we introduced attachments to messages. When creating or
replying to a message conversation you have the possibility to add
attachments. Currently there are no limitations to type or size of the
file.

## Gerenciar mensagens de validação e feedback { #manage-validation-and-feedback-messages } 

> **Note**
>
> You will only see feedback messages and have access to the extended
> handling tools if you are a member of the user group that is set up to
> handle feedback messages.
>
> With the new app you manage extended tools for tickets and validation
> messages through the icon menu which appears when viewing a message or
> checking of messages in the conversation list.

### Todas as mensagens selecionadas { #all-messages-selected } 
![All Messages Selected](resources/images/messaging/view_validation_select_all.png)
### Todas as mensagens selecionadas e o seletor de escolha estendida selecionado { #all-messages-selected-and-extended-choice-picker-selected } 
![All messages selected and extended choice picker selected](resources/images/messaging/view_validation_select_all_icon_menu.png)


You will receive feedback messages to your **Ticket** folder and
validation messages to your **Validation** folder. For feedback and
validation messages you have the following options in addition to the
messages options:

 <table style="width:100%;">
 <caption> Ferramentas de tratamento de feedback </caption>
 <colgroup>
 <col width="23%" />
 <col width="76%" />
 </colgroup>
 <thead>
 <tr class="header">
 Função <th> </th>
 <th> Descrição </th>
 </tr>
 </thead>
 <tbody>
 <tr class="odd">
 <td> <p> <strong> Prioridade </strong> </p> </td>
 <td> <p> Você pode marcar uma mensagem de feedback / validação com diferentes prioridades: <strong> Nenhum </strong>, <strong> Baixo </strong>, <strong> Médio</strong><strong> Alto </strong></p>
 <p> Definir a prioridade torna mais fácil acompanhar qual mensagem de feedback você precisa resolver primeiro e quais mensagens de feedback você pode esperar. </p> </td>
 </tr>
 <tr class="even">
 <td> <p> <strong> Status </strong> </p> </td>
 <td> <p> Todas as mensagens de feedback / validação obtêm o status <strong> Abra </strong> quando criado. </p>
 <p> Para rastrear as mensagens de feedback existentes, você pode alterar o status para <strong> Pendente </strong>, <strong> Inválido </strong> ou <strong> Resolvido </strong>. </p>
 <p> Você pode filtrar mensagens de feedback / validação com base em seu status com os dois menus suspensos na barra de cabeçalho interna. </p> </td>
 </tr>
 <tr class="odd">
 <td> <p> <strong> Atribuído a </strong> </p> </td>
 <td> <p> Você pode atribuir uma mensagem de feedback a qualquer membro do grupo de usuários configurado para lidar com mensagens de feedback. </p>
 <p> Você pode atribuir uma mensagem de validação a qualquer usuário no sistema. </p>
 <p> <strong> - </strong> significa que você não atribuiu um usuário à mensagem de feedback. </p> </td>
 </tr>
 <tr class="even">
 <td> <p> <strong> Resposta interna </strong> </p> </td>
 <td> <p> Quando você trabalha em uma equipe de tratamento de feedback, pode querer discutir o feedback antes de enviar uma resposta ao remetente. Você pode manter essa discussão na mesma conversa da mensagem que o feedback em si. </p>
 <p> Para enviar uma resposta dentro do grupo de usuários de tratamento de feedback, clique em <strong> RESPOSTA INTERNA </strong>. </p> </td>
 </tr>
 </tbody>
 </table>

## Configure a função de mensagem de feedback { #configure-feedback-message-function } 

Para configurar a função de mensagem de feedback, você deve:

1.  Create a user group (for example "Feedback message recipients") that
    contains all the users who should receive feedback messages.

2.  Open the **System Settings** app and click **General** \> **Feedback
    recipients** and select the user group you created in the previous
    step.



# Definir as preferências da conta do usuário { #user_account_preferences }

In **Edit user profile**, you can add personal information to your profile
such as your email address, mobile phone number, date of birth, profile
picture and more. When you send messages, the person receiving the message can see these
profile details. You can also provide account names for various direct
messaging services, which will be used by the system.

In **Edit user settings**, you can change the display language of DHIS2 and
the language of the database. The database language is the translated
content of the metadata, such as data elements and indicators. You can
also choose a display style, and enable or disable SMS and email
notifications. If you wish to, you can choose to display a short name,
such as "Joe" in the analysis modules, rather than your full name.

In **Edit account settings**, you can reset your password and setup 2-Factor
authentication. Setting up 2-Factor authentication will require you to
download the Google Authenticator app on you mobile device.

In the **View full profile** section, you find a summary of your profile details.
This section includes a few fields that you cannot edit yourself,
such as user roles and user organisation units.

In **Manage personal access tokens** you can view the existing personal access
tokens, revoke existing tokens and generate new ones. Personal access tokens are
an alternative to using passwords for authentication and useful for providing
(restricted) access to scripts and external applications. Note that the values of
newly generated personal access tokens are only visible right after generating.

Na seção **Sobre DHIS2**, encontrará uma lista de detalhes sobre a instância DHIS2.



# Configurar metadados { #maintenance_app } 

## Sobre o aplicativo de manutenção { #about_maintenance_app } 

In the **Maintenance** app you configure all the metadata objects you
need to collect and analyze data:

  - Categorias

  - Elementos de dados

  - Conjuntos de dados e formulários de entrada de dados

  - Indicadores

  - Unidades organizacionais

  - Program metadata: tracked entity, tracked entity attribute and
    relationship type

  - Regras de validação

  - Atributos

  - Constantes

  - Conjuntos de opções

  - Legendas

  - Preditores

  - Relatórios push

  - Camadas de mapa externas

> **Note**
>
> The functions you have access to depend on your user role's access
> permissions.



### Navegando em objetos de metadados { #navigating_metadata } 

Metadata objects are presented in a list with predefined columns that are relevant for each object.
You may customize which columns are shown in the list for the current object. These customizations are per user, and therefore will not affect other users. Note that these changes do not edit any metadata, just how the list is presented.

#### Gerenciando colunas visíveis { #managing-visible-columns } 

![](resources/images/maintenance/configurable_columns_dialog.png)

1. Click the ![](resources/images/maintenance/icon_settings.png) icon to the top right of the list of objects you want to configure.
2. Um menu suspenso aparecerá, selecione ** Gerenciar colunas **.
3. Uma caixa de diálogo aparecerá, com as colunas padrão selecionadas.
3. Clique em qualquer nome de coluna na lista de ** Colunas disponíveis ** para adicioná-las à lista de colunas selecionadas.
4. You may reorder the selected columns by drag-and-dropping the ![](resources/images/maintenance/icon_reorder.png) icon.
5. Você também pode remover qualquer coluna da visualização clicando no ícone X ao lado do nome.
6. Clique em ** Salvar ** quando estiver satisfeito com suas alterações.

Você pode redefinir facilmente para os valores padrão clicando no botão ** Redefinir para o padrão **.

##### Baixar metadados { #download-metadata } 

Você pode baixar os metadados do objeto que está visualizando no momento. O download dos metadados respeitará todos os filtros que você tiver ativo para a lista.

1. Click the ![](resources/images/maintenance/icon_settings.png) icon to the top right of the list of objects you want to configure.
2. Um menu suspenso aparecerá, selecione ** Download **.
3. Uma caixa de diálogo aparecerá, onde você pode selecionar o formato e compactação desejados.
4. ** Com compartilhamento ** pode ser selecionado para incluir compartilhamento de dados para os metadados.

## Gerenciar categorias { #manage_category } 

### Sobre categorias { #about_category } 

Categories are typically a concept, for example "Gender", "Age" or
"Disease Status". Data elements such as "Number of cases of confirmed
malaria" are often broken into smaller component parts to determine, for
example, the number of confirmed malaria cases of particular age groups.

Use categories to disaggregate data elements into individual components.
You can also use categories to assign metadata attributes to all data
recorded in a specific dataset, such as "Implementing partner" or
"Funding agency."

Create three categories: "Under 1", "1-5" and "Over 5". Assign them as
categories to the data element. This creates three separate fields for
this data in the data entry forms:

  - Número de casos de malária confirmados (menos de 1)

  - Número de casos de malária confirmados (1-5)

  - Número de casos de malária confirmados (mais de 5)

Without categories, you would have had to create each of the data
elements listed above separately.

In the **Maintenance** app, you manage the following and category
objects:



Table: Category objects in the Maintenance app

| Object type | Available functions |
|---|---|
| Category option | Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate |
| Category | Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate |
| Category combination | Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate |
| Category option combination | Edit and show details |
| Category option group | Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate |
| Category option group set | Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate |

### Fluxo de Trabalho { #workflow_category } 

1.  Crie todas as opções de categoria.

2.  Create categories composed by the multiple category options you've
    created.

3.  Create category combinations composed by either one or multiple
    categories.

4.  Crie elementos de dados e atribua-os a uma combinação de categorias.

### Crie ou edite uma opção de categoria { #create_category_option } 

When possible, recycle category options. For instance, there might be
two categories which might share a particular category option (for
example \<1 year of age). When creating the categories, this category
option could be reused. This is important if particular category options
(or category option combinations) that need to be analyzed together.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Category** \> **Category
    option**.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  Preencher o formulário:

    1.  **Nome**

    2.  **Short name** (optional)

    3.  **Code** (optional)

    4.  **Form name** (optional)
        Category options can have a form name. These will be displayed in the
        data entry app as a column header instead of the display name for the
        respective category option.

    5.  **Descrição**

    6.  **Start date** (optional)

    7.  **End date** (optional)

4.  Selecione unidades de organização e atribua-as.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > You can automatically select all organisation units that belong to
    > an organisation unit level or organisation unit group, for example
    > "Chiefdom" or "Urban. To do this:
    >
    > Select an **Organisation unit level** or **Organisation unit
    > group** and click **Select**.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Crie ou edite uma categoria { #create_category } 

When you have created all category options for a particular category,
you can create that category.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Manutenção ** e clique em ** Categoria ** \> ** Categoria **.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  Preencher o formulário:

    1.  **Nome**

    2.  **Nome curto**

    3.  **Código**

    4.  **Descrição**

    5.  ** Tipo de dimensão de dados **

        A category can either be of type "Disaggregation" or "Attribute".
        For disaggregation of data elements, you select
        **Disaggregation**. The data dimension type "Attribute" allows
        the category to be used to assign a combination of categories to
        data recorded through a data set.

    6.  ** Dimensão de dados **

        If you select **Data dimension**, the category will be available
        to the analytics as another dimension, in addition to the
        standard dimensions of "Period" and "Organisation unit".

4.  Selecione as opções de categoria e atribua-as.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Crie ou edite uma combinação de categorias { #create_category_combination } 

Category combinations lets you combine multiple categories into a
related set.

You can disaggregate the data element "Number of new HIV infections"
into the following categories:

  - Serviço de HIV: "Outro", "PMTCT", "TB"

  - Gênero Masculino Feminino"

In this example, there are two levels of disaggregation that consist of
two separate data element categories. Each data element category consist
of several data element category options.

In DHIS2, different data elements are disaggregated according to a
common set of categories. By combining these different categories into a
category combination and assigning these combinations to data elements,
you can apply the appropriate disaggregation levels quickly to a large
number of data elements.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Category** \> **Category
    combination**.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  Preencher o formulário:

    1.  **Nome**

    2.  **Código**

    3.  ** Tipo de dimensão de dados **

    4.  ** Pular categoria total em relatórios **

4.  Selecione categorias e atribua-as.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Criar ou editar um grupo de opções de categoria { #create_category_option_group } 

You can group and classify category options by using category option
groups. The main purpose of the category option group set is to add more
dimensionality to your captured data for analysis in for example the
**Pivot table** or **Data Visualizer** apps.

Consider a system where data is collected by "projects", and projects are modelled
as category options. The system must be able to analyse data based on
which donor supports the project. In this case, create a category
option group set called "Donor". Each donor can be created as a category
option group, where each category option / project is put in the
appropriate group. In the data analysis applications, the "Donor" group
set will appear as a data dimension, while each donor appear as
dimension items, ready to be included in reports.

Para criar um grupo de opções de categoria:

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Category** \> **Category
    option group**.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  Preencher o formulário:

    1.  **Nome**

    2.  ** Nome curto **: Defina um nome curto para o elemento de dados.

    3.  **Código**

    4.  **Descrição**

    5.  ** Tipo de dimensão de dados **

4.  Selecione ** Opções de categoria ** e atribua-as.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Criar ou editar um grupo de opções de categoria definido { #create_category_option_group_set } 

You can group category option groups in category option group sets. The
main purpose of the category option group set is to add more
dimensionality to your captured data for analysis in for example the
**Pivot table** or **Data Visualizer** apps.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Category** \> **Category
    option group set**.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  Preencher o formulário:

    1.  **Nome**

    2.  **Nome curto**

    3.  **Descrição**

    4.  ** Dimensão de dados **

    5.  ** Tipo de dimensão de dados **

4.  Selecione ** Grupos de opções de categoria ** e atribua-os.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Use combinações de categorias para conjuntos de dados { #use_category_combo_for_data_set } 

When categories and category combinations have the data dimension type
"Attribute", they can apply a common set of attributes to a related set
of data values contained in a data set. When category combinations are
used as a attribute, they serve as another dimension (similar to
"Period" and "Organisation unit") which you can use in your analysis.

Suppose that a NGO is providing ART services in a given facility. They
would need to report each month on the "ART monthly summary", which
would contain a number of data elements. The NGO and project could
potentially change over time. In order to attribute data to a given NGO
and project at any point in time, you need to record this information
with each data value at the time of data entry.

1.  Create two categories with the data dimension type "Attribute":
    "Implementing partner" and "Projects".

2.  Create a category combination with the data dimension type
    "Attribute": "Implementing partners and projects".

3.  Atribua as categorias que você criou à combinação de categorias.

4.  Create a data set called "ART monthly summary" and select the
    "Implementing partners and projects" category combination.

When you enter data in the **Data entry** app, you can select an
"Implementing partner" and a "Project". Each recorded data value, is
assigned a specific combination of these categories as an attribute.
These attributes (when specified as a dimension) can be used in the
analysis applications similar to other dimensions, for example the
period and organisation unit.

![](resources/images/maintenance/categories_dataset_attributes.png)

### Atribuir um código a uma combinação de opção de categoria { #assign_code_category_option_combo } 

You can assign a code to category option combinations. This makes data
exchange between DHIS2 and external systems easier. The system creates
the category option combinations automatically.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Category** \> **Category
    option combination**.

2.  Na lista, encontre o objeto que deseja modificar.

3.  Clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Editar **.

4.  Insira um código.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Clonar objetos de metadados { #clone_metadata } 

Cloning a data element or other objects can save time when you create
many similar objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to clone.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Clonar **.

3.  Modifique as opções que você deseja.

4.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Alterar as configurações de compartilhamento para objetos de metadados { #change-sharing-settings-for-metadata-objects } 

You can assign different sharing settings to metadata objects, for
example organisation units and tracked entity attributes. These sharing
settings control which users and users groups that can view or edit a
metadata object.

Some metadata objects also allows you to change the sharing setting of
data entry for the object. These additional settings control who can
view or enter data in form fields using the metadata.

> **Note**
>
> The default setting is that everyone (**Public access**) can find,
> view and edit metadata objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to modify.

2.  In the object list, click the context menu and select **Sharing
    settings**.

3.  (Optional) Add users or user groups: search for a user or a user
    group and select it. The user or user group is added to the list.

4.  Altere as configurações de compartilhamento dos grupos de acesso que você deseja modificar.

      - **Can edit and view**: The access group can view and edit the
        object.

      - ** Pode visualizar apenas **: O grupo de acesso pode visualizar o objeto.

      - **No access** (only applicable to **Public access**): The public
        won't have access to the object.

5.  Change data sharing settings for the access groups you want to
    modify.

      - **Can capture data**: The access group can view and capture data
        for the object.

      - **Can view data**: The access group can view data for the
        object.

      - **No access**: The access group won't have access to data for
        the object.

6.  Clique em ** Fechar **.

### Excluir objetos de metadados { #delete-metadata-objects } 

> **Note**
>
> You can only delete a data element and other data element objects if
> no data is associated to the data element itself.

> **Warning**
>
> Any data set that you delete from the system is irrevocably lost. All
> data entry forms, and section forms which may have been developed will
> also be removed. Make sure that you have made a backup of your
> database before deleting any data set in case you need to restore it
> at some point in time.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to delete.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Excluir **.

3.  Clique em ** Confirmar **.

### Exibir detalhes de objetos de metadados { #display-details-of-metadata-objects } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to view.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Show
    details**.

### Traduzir objetos de metadados { #translate-metadata-objects } 

DHIS2 provides functionality for translations of database content, for
example data elements, data element groups, indicators, indicator groups
or organisation units. You can translate these elements to any number of
locales. A locale represents a specific geographical, political, or
cultural region.

> **Tip**
>
> To activate a translation, open the **System Settings** app, click \>
> **Appearance** and select a language.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to translate.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Traduzir **.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > If you want to translate an organisation unit level, click
    > directly on the **Translate** icon next to each list item.

3.  Selecione um local.

4.  Digite um ** Nome **, ** Nome curto ** e ** Descrição **.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

## Gerenciar elementos de dados { #manage_data_element } 

### Sobre os elementos de dados { #about_data_element } 

Data elements are the base of DHIS2. Data elements define what is
actually recorded in the system, for example number of immunisations or
number of cases of malaria.

Data elements such as "Number of cases of confirmed malaria" are often
broken into smaller component parts to determine, for example, the
number of confirmed malaria cases of particular age groups.

In the **Maintenance** app, you manage the following data elements
objects:



Table: Data element objects in the Maintenance app

| Object type | Available functions |
|---|---|
| Elemento de dados | Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate |
| Data element group | Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate |
| Data element group set | Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate |

### Fluxo de Trabalho { #workflow_data_element } 

1.  Crie todas as opções de categoria.

2.  Create categories composed by the multiple category options you've
    created.

3.  Create category combinations composed by either one or multiple
    categories.

4.  Crie elementos de dados e atribua-os a uma combinação de categorias.

### Crie ou edite um elemento de dados { #create_data_element } 

![](resources/images/maintenance/create_data_element.png)

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Data elements** \> **Data
    element**.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  No campo ** Nome **, defina o nome preciso do elemento de dados.

    Cada elemento de dados deve ter um nome exclusivo.

4.  In the **Short name** field, define a short name for the data
    element.

    Typically, the short name is an abbreviation of the full data
    element name. This attribute is often used in reports to display the
    name of the data element, where space is limited.

5.  (Opcional) No campo ** Código **, atribua um código.

    Em muitos países, os elementos de dados são atribuídos a um código.

6.  (Optional) In the **Color** field, assign a color which will be used
    for this data element in the data capture apps.

7.  (Optional) In the **Icon** field, assign an icon which will be used
    for this data element in the data capture apps.

8.  In the **Description** field, type a description of the data
    element. Be as precise as possible and include complete information
    about how the data element is measured and what its purpose is.

8. (Optional) In the **Field mask** field, you may type a template that's used to provide
   hints for correct formatting of the data element.

     > **NOTE**
     >
     > So far this is only implemented in the DHIS2 Android Capture app; not in the Capture and Tracker Capture web apps.

   A seguir estão os caracteres especiais que podem ser usados na máscara. Os caracteres especiais correspondem exatamente a um caractere do tipo fornecido.

   | Personagem | Match |
   | ------------- |----------------|
   | \\ d | dígito |
   | \\ x | letra minúscula |
   | \\ X | letra maiúscula |
   | \\ w | qualquer caractere alfanumérico |

   For example, the pattern can be used to show hyphens as needed in the input field of the data element. E.g "\d\d\d-\d\d\d-\d\d\d, would
   show a hyphen for every third digit.

9.  In the **Form name** field, type an alternative name of the data
    element. This name can be used in either section or automatic data
    entry forms. The form name is applied automatically.

10. In the **Domain type** field, select whether the data element is an
    aggregate or tracker type of data element.

11. In the **Value type** field, select the type of data that the data
    element will record.



    Table: Value types

    | Value type | Description |
    |---|---|
    | Age | - |
    | Coordinate | A point coordinate specified as longitude and latitude in decimal degrees. All coordinate should be specified in the format "-19.23 , 56.42" with a comma separating the longitude and latitude. |
    | Date | Dates rendered as calendar widget in data entry. |
    | Date & time | Is a combination of the **DATE** and **TIME** data elements. |
    | Email | Email. |
    | File | A file resource where you can store external files, for example documents and photos. |
    | Image | A file resource where you can store photos.<br>     <br>Unlike the **FILE** data element, the **IMAGE** data element can display the uploaded image directly in forms. |
    | Integer | Any whole number (positive and negative), including zero. |
    | Letter | A single letter. |
    | Long text | Textual value. Renders as text area with no length constraint in forms. |
    | Negative integer | Any whole number less than (but not including) zero. |
    | Number | Any real numeric value with a single decimal point. Thousands separators and scientific notation is not supported. |
    | Percentage | Whole numbers inclusive between 0 and 100. |
    | Phone number | Phone number. |
    | Positive integer | Any whole number greater than (but not including) zero. |
    | Positive or zero integer | Any positive whole number, including zero. |
    | Organisation unit | Organisation units rendered as a hierarchy tree widget.<br>     <br>If the user has assigned "search organisation units", these will be displayed instead of the assigned organisation units. |
    | Unit interval | Any real number greater than or equal to 0 and less than or equal to 1. |
    | Text | Textual value. The maximum number of allowed characters per value is 50,000. |
    | Time | Time is stored in HH:mm format.<br>     <br>HH is a number between 0 and 23<br>     <br>mm is a number between 00 and 59 |
    | Tracker associate | Tracked entity instance. Rendered as dialog with a list of tracked entity instances and a search field. |
    | Username | DHIS2 user. Rendered as a dialog with a list of users and a search field. The user will need the "View User" authority to be able to utilise this data type |
    | Yes/No | Boolean values, renders as drop-down lists in data entry. |
    | Yes only | True values, renders as check-boxes in data entry. |

12. In the **Aggregation type** field, select the default aggregation
    operation that will be used on the data element.

    Most data elements should have the **Sum** operator. This includes
    all data elements which should be added together. Other data
    elements, such as staffing levels, should be set to use the
    **Average** operator, when values along the time dimension should
    not be added together, but rather averaged.



    Table: Aggregation operators

    | Aggregation operator | Description |
    |---|---|
    | Average | Average the values in both the period as and the organisation unit dimensions. |
    | Average (sum in organisation unit hierarchy) | Average of data values in the period dimension, sum in the organisation unit dimensions. |
    | Count | Count of data values. |
    | Min | Minimum of data values. |
    | Max | Maximum of data values. |
    | None | No aggregation is performed in any dimension. |
    | Sum | Sum of data values in the period and organisation unit dimension. |
    | Standard deviation | Standard deviation (population-based) of data values. |
    | Variance | Variance (population-based) of data values. |

13. If you want to save zeros for a particular reason, select **Store
    zero data values**. By default, DHIS2 does not store zeros entered
    in the data entry module.

14. In the **URL** field, enter a link to an in-depth description of the
    data element.

    For example a link to a metadata repository or registry that
    contains detailed technical information about the definition and
    measurement of the data element.

15. In the **Category combination** field, define which category
    combination the data element should have. This is also known as the
    "disaggregation".

16. Selecione um ** Conjunto de opções **.

    Option sets are predefined lists of options which can be used in
    data entry.

17. Selecione um ** Conjunto de opções para comentários **.

    Option sets for comments are predefined lists of options which can
    be used to specify standardized comments for data values in data
    entry.

18. Atribua uma ou várias ** Legendas **.

    Legends are used in for example the **Maps** app to display certain
    data elements with certain icons.

19. Set the **Aggregation levels** to allow the data element to be
    aggregated at one or more levels:

    1.  In the left pane, select the levels you want to assign to the
        data element.

    2.  Clique na seta para a direita para atribuir os níveis de agregação.

    By default, the aggregation will start at the lowest assigned
    organisation unit. If you for example select "Chiefdom", it means
    that "Chiefdom", "District", and "National" aggregates use
    "Chiefdom" (the highest aggregation level available) as the data
    source, and PHU data will not be included. PHU data will still be
    available for the PHU level, but not included in aggregations to the
    levels above.

    If you select both "District" and "Chiefdom", it means that the
    "District" and "National" level aggregates use District data as
    their source, "Chiefdom" will use Chiefdom, and "PHU" will use PHU.

20. If applicable, enter custom attributes values, for example
    **Classification** or **Collection method**.

    > **Note**
    >
    > You create custom attributes in the **Maintenance** app: **Other**
    > \> **Attributes**.

21. If applicable, select compulsory data element group sets, for
    example **Main data element group** or **Tracker-based data**.

    > **Note**
    >
    > You'll only see data element group sets in this form if you've
    > created them and set them to **Compulsory**.
    >
    > You create data element group sets in the **Maintenance** app:
    > **Data element** \> **Date element group set**.

22. Clique em **Salvar**.

### Crie ou edite um grupo de elementos de dados { #create_data_element_group } 

Data element groups lets you classify related data elements into a
common theme. For example, two data elements "Measles immunisation" and
"BCG Immunisation" might be grouped together into a data element group
"Childhood immunisation".

Para criar um grupo de elementos de dados:

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Data elements** \> **Data
    element group**.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  Preencher o formulário:

    1.  **Nome**

    2.  **Nome curto**

    3.  **Código**

4.  Selecione os elementos de dados e atribua-os.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Crie ou edite um conjunto de grupos de elementos de dados { #create_data_element_group_set } 

Data element group sets allows you to categorise multiple data element
groups into a set. The system uses data element group sets during
analysis and reporting to combine similar data element groups into a
common theme. A data element group can be part of multiple data element
group sets.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Data elements** \> **Data
    element group set**.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  Preencher o formulário:

    1.  **Nome**
    2.  **Nome curto**
    3.  **Código**
    4.  **Descrição**
    5.  **Obrigatório**
    5.  ** Dimensão de dados **

4.  Selecione grupos de elementos de dados e atribua-os.

    Available data element groups are displayed in the left panel. Data
    element groups that are currently members of the data element group
    set are displayed in the right hand panel.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Clonar objetos de metadados { #clone_metadata } 

Cloning a data element or other objects can save time when you create
many similar objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to clone.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Clonar **.

3.  Modifique as opções que você deseja.

4.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Alterar as configurações de compartilhamento para objetos de metadados { #change-sharing-settings-for-metadata-objects } 

You can assign different sharing settings to metadata objects, for
example organisation units and tracked entity attributes. These sharing
settings control which users and users groups that can view or edit a
metadata object.

Some metadata objects also allows you to change the sharing setting of
data entry for the object. These additional settings control who can
view or enter data in form fields using the metadata.

> **Note**
>
> The default setting is that everyone (**Public access**) can find,
> view and edit metadata objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to modify.

2.  In the object list, click the context menu and select **Sharing
    settings**.

3.  (Optional) Add users or user groups: search for a user or a user
    group and select it. The user or user group is added to the list.

4.  Altere as configurações de compartilhamento dos grupos de acesso que você deseja modificar.

      - **Can edit and view**: The access group can view and edit the
        object.

      - ** Pode visualizar apenas **: O grupo de acesso pode visualizar o objeto.

      - **No access** (only applicable to **Public access**): The public
        won't have access to the object.

5.  Change data sharing settings for the access groups you want to
    modify.

      - **Can capture data**: The access group can view and capture data
        for the object.

      - **Can view data**: The access group can view data for the
        object.

      - **No access**: The access group won't have access to data for
        the object.

6.  Clique em ** Fechar **.

### Excluir objetos de metadados { #delete-metadata-objects } 

> **Note**
>
> You can only delete a data element and other data element objects if
> no data is associated to the data element itself.

> **Warning**
>
> Any data set that you delete from the system is irrevocably lost. All
> data entry forms, and section forms which may have been developed will
> also be removed. Make sure that you have made a backup of your
> database before deleting any data set in case you need to restore it
> at some point in time.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to delete.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Excluir **.

3.  Clique em ** Confirmar **.

### Exibir detalhes de objetos de metadados { #display-details-of-metadata-objects } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to view.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Show
    details**.

### Traduzir objetos de metadados { #translate-metadata-objects } 

DHIS2 provides functionality for translations of database content, for
example data elements, data element groups, indicators, indicator groups
or organisation units. You can translate these elements to any number of
locales. A locale represents a specific geographical, political, or
cultural region.

> **Tip**
>
> To activate a translation, open the **System Settings** app, click \>
> **Appearance** and select a language.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to translate.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Traduzir **.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > If you want to translate an organisation unit level, click
    > directly on the **Translate** icon next to each list item.

3.  Selecione um local.

4.  Digite um ** Nome **, ** Nome curto ** e ** Descrição **.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

## Gerenciar conjuntos de dados e formulários de entrada de dados { #manage_data_set } 

### Sobre conjuntos de dados e formulários de entrada de dados { #about_dataset_dataform } 

All data entry in DHIS2 is organised in data sets. A data set is a
collection of data elements grouped together for data entry and data
export between instances of DHIS2. To use a data set to collect data for
a specific organisation unit, you must assign the organisation unit to
the data set. Once you have assigned the data set to an organisation
unit, that data set is available in the **Data entry** app. Only the
organisation units that you have assigned the data set to can use the
data set for data entry.

A category combination can link to both data elements and data sets. If
you use a category combination for a data set, the category combinations
is applicable for the whole form. This means that you can use categories
to capture information which is common to an entire form, for example
the name of the a project or grant. When a data set is linked to a
category combination, those categories will be displayed as drop-down
boxes in the **Data entry** app. Data captured in the form will then be
linked to the selected category options from those drop-down boxes. For
information about how to create categories and category combinations,
see section "Manage data elements and categories". Make sure that you
set the type of categories and category combinations to "Attribute".

An scenario for when categories are useful is when you need to capture a
data entry form for a implementing partner organisation and a project.
In that case:

1.  Create category options and categories for all partner organisations
    and projects and link them in a new category combination.

2.  Assign the category combination to the data set (form) for which you
    need to capture this information.

    When opening this data set in data entry module, the partner
    organisation and project categories will automatically be rendered
    as drop-down boxes, allowing you to select a specific implementing
    partner organisation and project before continuing to do data entry.

You create and edit data sets in the **Maintenance** app. Here you
define, for example, which data elements you want to include in the data
set and the data collection frequency.

You enter data in the **Data entry** app. The **Data entry** app uses
data entry forms to display the data sets. There are three types of data
entry forms:



Table: Data entry form types

| Data entry form type | Descrição |
|---|---|
| Default form | Once you have assigned a data set to an organisation unit, a default form is created automatically. The default form is then available in the **Data entry** app for the organisation units you have assigned it to.<br> <br>A default form consist of a list of the data elements belonging to the data set together with a column for inputting the values. If your data set contains data elements with a non-default category combination, for example age groups or gender, additional columns are automatically created in the default form based on the different categories.<br> <br>If you use more than one category combination you get multiple columns in the default form with different column headings for the options. |
| Section form | If the default form doesn't meet your needs, you can modify it to create a section form. Section forms give you more flexibility when it comes to using tabular forms.<br> <br>In a section form you can, for example, create multiple tables with subheadings and disable (grey out) cells in a table.<br> <br>When you have added a section form to a data set, the section form is available in the **Data entry** app. |
| Custom form | If the form you want to design is too complicated for default or section forms, you can create a custom form. A custom form takes more time to create than a section form, but you have full control over the design.<br> <br>You can, for example, mimic an existing paper aggregation form with a custom form. This makes data entry easier, and should reduce the number incorrectly entered data elements.<br> <br>When you have added a custom form to a data set, the custom form is available in the **Data entry** app. |

> **Note**
>
> If a data set has both a section form and a custom form, the system
> displays the custom form during data entry. Users who enter data can't
> select which form they want to use. In web-based data entry the order
> of display preference is:
>
> 1.  Custom form (if it exists)
>
> 2.  Section form (if it exists)
>
> 3.  Default form
>
> Mobile devices do not support custom forms. In mobile-based data entry
> the order of display preference is:
>
> 1.  Section form (if it exists)
>
> 2.  Default form

No aplicativo ** Manutenção **, você gerencia os seguintes objetos de conjunto de dados:



Table: Data set objects in the Maintenance app

| Object type | Available functions |
|---|---|
| Conjunto de dados | Create, assign to organisation units, edit, share, delete, show details and translate<br> <br>Edit compulsory data elements<br> <br>Add and remove multiple data sets to organisation units at once |
| Section form | Create, edit and manage grey fields |
| Section | Change display order, delete and translate |
| Custom form | Create, edit and script |

### Fluxo de Trabalho { #workflow_data_set } 

You need to have data elements and categories to create data sets and
data entry forms.

1.  Crie um conjunto de dados.

2.  Atribua o conjunto de dados às unidades de organização.

    Um formulário padrão é criado automaticamente.

3.  Crie um formulário de seção ou um formulário personalizado.

    Agora você pode registrar dados no aplicativo ** Entrada de dados **.

### Crie ou edite um conjunto de dados { #create_data_set } 

![](resources/images/datasets/data_set_create.png)

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Manutenção ** e clique em ** Conjunto de dados ** \> ** Conjunto de dados **.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  No campo ** Nome **, digite o nome preciso do conjunto de dados.

4.  No campo ** Nome abreviado **, defina um nome abreviado para o conjunto de dados.

    Typically, the short name is an abbreviation of the full data set
    name. This attribute is often used to display the name of the data
    set where space is limited.

5.  (Opcional) No campo ** Código **, atribua um código.

6.  No campo ** Descrição **, digite uma descrição do conjunto de dados.

7.  Insira o número de ** Dias de expiração **.

    The number of expiry days controls for how long it should be
    possible to enter data in the **Data entry** app for this data set.
    Expiry days refer to the number of days after the end date of the
    selected data entry period where the data entry form should be open
    for entry. After the number of days has expired, the data set will
    be locked for further entry.

    You can set manual exceptions to this using the lock exception
    functionality in the **Data Administration** app.

    > **Note**
    >
    > To allow data entry into all possible historical time periods, set
    > the number of expiry days to zero.

8.  If you want it to be possible to enter data for future periods, type
    the number of periods in the **Open future periods for data entry**
    field.

    The value is the number of future periods which are available for
    data entry.

    For a monthly data set a value of 2 allows you to enter data for 2
    months in advance. This is useful for, by example, population,
    target and planning data.

9.  In the **Days after period to qualify for timely submission** field,
    type the number of days in which data can be entered to be
    considered reported on time.

    To verify the number of timely reports submitted, go to **Reports**
    \> **Reporting rate summary**.

10. Selecione um ** Tipo de período **.

    The period type defines the frequency of reporting for the
    particular data set. The frequency can for example be daily,
    quarterly or yearly.

11. Selecione uma ** Combinação de categoria ** para atribuí-la ao conjunto de dados.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > Click **Add new** to create category combinations that you're
    > missing. In the form that opens, create the category combinations
    > you need. When you're done, click **Refresh values**.

12. If you selected a category combination other than **None**,
    you may enter zero or a positive number for **Open periods after
    category option end date**. This lets you enter data in this data
    set for a category option up to the specified number of periods
    after that category option's end date.

13. In the **Complete notification recipients** list, select a user
    group that should receive a message when the data set is marked as
    complete in the **Data Entry** app.

    A mensagem é entregue por meio do sistema de mensagens DHIS2.

14. If you want the user who entered the data to receive a message when
    the data set is marked as complete in the **Data entry** app, select
    **Send notification to completing user**.

    A mensagem é entregue por meio do sistema de mensagens DHIS2.

15. Se aplicável, selecione um ** Fluxo de trabalho de aprovação de dados **.

16. If you want it to be possible to use the data set within the Java
    mobile DHIS2 application, select **Enable for Java mobile client**.

17. If you want it to be mandatory to fill all values for a data element
    in data entry if one or more values have been filled, select **All
    fields for data elements required**.

    This means that if you enter one data value for a data element in an
    entry field (that is for a category option combination), then you
    must enter data for all fields belonging to that data element (that
    is all category option combinations).

18. If you want it to be possible to mark a data entry form as complete
    only if the validation of that form is successful, select **Complete
    allowed only if validation passes**.

    If you select this option, you can't mark the form as complete if
    validation fails.

19. If you want it to be mandatory that any missing values require a
    comment to justify their absence, select **Missing values requires
    comment on complete**.

20. (Opcional) Atribua uma ou várias ** Legendas **.

21. Se aplicável, selecione ** Pular offline **.

    This option controls whether this data entry form should be
    downloaded and saved in the user's web browser. Normally you
    shouldn't select **Skip offline**. This is the default setting. If
    you have big forms which are rarely used you can consider selecting
    this option to speed up initial loading in the data entry module.

22. Se aplicável, selecione ** Decoração do elemento de dados **

    If you select this option, descriptions of data elements render in
    call-outs in downloaded data sets in offline mode in the **Data
    entry** app.

23. Se aplicável, selecione ** Renderizar seções como guias **.

    This option is only applicable for section forms. The option allows
    you to render each section as a tab horizontally above the data set.
    This is useful for long data sets as it allows appropriate sections
    to be selected quickly without going through the entire form.

24. Se aplicável, selecione ** Renderizar verticalmente **.

    Esta opção é aplicável apenas para formulários de seção.

25. Selecione os elementos de dados e atribua-os.

    You can override the category combination for each selected data set
    by clicking on the gear icon above the list of selected data
    elements. This allows you to utilize a specific category combination
    (disaggregation) within the current data set instead of the category
    combination associated directly with the data element itself.

26. Selecione indicadores e atribua-os.

27. In the organisation unit tree, select the organisation units you
    want to assign the data set to.

    > **Tip**
    >
    >   - Click **Organisation unit level** to select all organisation
    >     units that belong to a certain organisation level.
    >
    >   - Click **Organisation unit group** to select all organisation
    >     units that belong to a certain organisation unit group.

28. Clique em **Salvar**.

You can now use the data set in the **Data Entry** app for the
organisation units that you have assigned to and for periods according
to the selected frequency (period type).

### Criar ou editar notificação de conjunto de dados { #create_data_set_notification } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Data set** \> **Data set
    notification**.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

#### O que enviar? { #what-to-send } 

![](resources/images/datasets/dataset_notification_create.png)

1.  In the **Name** field, type the precise name of the data set
    notification.

2.  (Opcional) No campo ** Código **, atribua um código.

3.  Insira ** Conjuntos de dados **.

    These data sets will be associated to this notification. In case any
    of them is completed for a certain period and organisation unit,
    notification will be generated by the system.

    > **Note**
    >
    > Nothing will happen if no data set is selected

4.  Na seção ** Modelo de mensagem **, existem dois parâmetros.

      - **Subject template** subject of the notification sent in
        notification. It can have values from the list of variables
        available on the right side.

      - **Message template** actual message sent in notification. It can
        have values from the list of variables available on the right
        side.

    > **Note**
    >
    > Subject is only relevant in case of Email and internal DHIS2
    > messages. It is ignored in case of SMS.

#### Quando enviar? { #when-to-send } 

![](resources/images/datasets/when_to_send.png)

1.  **Data set notification trigger** field determine when to send
    notification.

      - **Data Set Completion** will trigger notification as soon as
        data set is completed.

      - **Schedule Days** will schedule notification based on number days
        relative to scheduled date. Schedule date will be decided by
        Period associated with Data set.

          - **Send notification as** provides two different types of
            notifications

              - ** Resumo coletivo ** enviar notificação em modo resumido

              - **Single notification** sends notification in single
                mood

    > **Note**
    >
    > **Send notification as** option is only available in case of
    > scheduled notification. This option is set to default which is
    > **Single notification** in case of completion notification

#### Quem enviar? { #who-to-send } 

![](resources/images/datasets/who_to_send.png)

1.  **Notification recipient** field determine recipients of the
    notification.

      - **Organisation Unit contact** will send notification to contact
        assigned to organisation unit which the data has been collected
        from.

      - **UserGroup** will send notification to all the member of the
        selected UserGroup.

    > **Note**
    >
    > An internal DHIS2 message will be sent in case if recipient is
    > UserGroup. Moreover user will also receive SMS/EMAIL if phone
    > number and email address exist for that user and SMS/EMAIL
    > notifications are enabled in SystemSettings

### Substituir combinações de categorias de elementos de dados em um conjunto de dados { #override_dataelement_catcombo_in_dataset } 

You can override which category combination to use for a data element
within the context of a data set. This means that a data element can use
different category combinations within different data sets. This is
useful when you want to reuse a data element since you don't have to
replicate the data element to allow multiple category combinations.

If different regions within your organisation unit hierarchy use
different disaggregations, or if the disaggregations change over time,
you can represent this by creating different data sets with the
appropriate category combinations.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Manutenção ** e clique em ** Conjunto de dados ** \> ** Conjunto de dados **.

2.  Na lista, encontre o conjunto de dados que deseja modificar.

3.  Clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Editar **.

4.  Vá para a seção de elementos de dados e clique no ícone de chave inglesa.

5.  Selecione novas combinações de categoria e clique em ** Fechar **.

6.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Editar elementos de dados obrigatórios em um conjunto de dados { #edit_compulsory_dataelement_in_dataset } 

You can add or remove data elements which will be marked as compulsory
during data entry.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Manutenção ** e clique em ** Conjunto de dados ** \> ** Conjunto de dados **.

2.  Na lista, encontre o conjunto de dados que deseja editar.

3.  Clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Editar elementos de dados obrigatórios **.

4.  Atribua os elementos de dados obrigatórios.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Baixe formulários de dados padrão em formato PDF { #download_defaultform_pdf } 

You can download a default data from in PDF format for offline data
entry.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Manutenção ** e clique em ** Conjunto de dados ** \> ** Conjunto de dados **.

2.  Na lista, encontre o objeto que deseja baixar.

3.  Clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Obter PDF para entrada de dados **.

### Gerenciar formulários de seção { #manage_section_form } 

#### Criar um formulário de seção { #create-a-section-form } 

Section forms are separated automatically by data element category
combinations, which produce a spreadsheet like data entry form for each
section.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Manutenção ** e clique em ** Conjunto de dados ** \> ** Conjunto de dados **.

2.  In the list, find the data set you want to create a section form
    for.

3.  Clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Gerenciar seções **.

4.  Clique no botão adicionar.

5.  (Opcional) No campo ** Nome **, digite o nome da seção.

6.  (Optional) In the **Description** field, type a description of the
    section.

7.  (Optional) To display totals for rows in the section form during
    data entry, select **Show row totals**.

8.  (Optional) To display totals for columns in the section form during
    data entry, select **Show column totals**.

9.  (Optional) To prevent automatic grouping of data of data elements with the same category combo, 
    select **Disable automatic grouping of data elements**. This is useful if you want the order of the data elements
    to be respected regardless of differing category combos.

10.  Atribua elementos de dados à seção:

    1.  (Opcional) Selecione um ** Filtro de combinação de categoria **.

        > **Note**
        >
        > You can only use one category combination per section.


        | Option | Description |
        |---|---|
        | **None** | Displays all data elements that don't have a category combination. |
        | **<No filter\>** | Displays all data elements. |

    2.  Select data elements and assign them.

11. (Optional) Sort the data elements within the section by using the up
    and down arrows to the left of the assigned data elements field.

12. Clique em **Salvar**.

13. Repeat add section steps for each section you want to have in your
    section form.

    In the **Data Entry** app you can now use the section form. The
    section form appears automatically when sections are available for
    the selected data set. Data sets which have section forms will
    automatically display the section form.

Note how each data element category has been separated into a separate
section, and a data entry table has been automatically generated by the
system. Use of section forms in combination with data element categories
can drastically reduce the amount of time which is required to create
data entry forms for data sets.


![](resources/images/dhis2UserManual/section_form.png)

#### Editar um formulário de seção { #edit-a-section-form } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Manutenção ** e clique em ** Conjunto de dados ** \> ** Conjunto de dados **.

2.  In the list, find the data set you want to edit the section form
    for.

3.  Clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Gerenciar seções **.

4.  Na lista, encontre a seção que deseja editar.

5.  Clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Editar **.

6.  Edite a seção e clique em ** Salvar **.

7.  Repita as etapas de edição da seção para cada seção que deseja editar.

#### Gerenciar campos cinza em um formulário de seção { #manage-grey-fields-in-a-section-form } 

You can disable data elements and category options for data entry. That
means it won’t be possible to enter data into these fields during data
entry.

![](resources/images/datasets/section_form_grey_fields.png)

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Manutenção ** e clique em ** Conjunto de dados ** \> ** Conjunto de dados **.

2.  In the list, find the data set you want to edit the section form
    for.

3.  Clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Gerenciar seções **.

4.  Na lista, encontre a seção que deseja editar.

5.  Clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Gerenciar campos cinza **.

6.  Selecione quais campos você deseja desativar.

    > **Note**
    >
    > If you've sections that contain data elements assigned to multiple
    > category combinations, switch between the category combinations to
    > view all fields.

7.  Clique em **Salvar**.

#### Alterar a ordem de exibição da seção em um formulário de seção { #change-section-display-order-in-a-section-form } 

Você pode controlar em que ordem as seções são exibidas em um formulário de seção.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Manutenção ** e clique em ** Conjunto de dados ** \> ** Conjunto de dados **.

2.  In the list, find the data set you want to edit the section form
    for.

3.  Clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Gerenciar seções **.

4.  Na lista, encontre a seção que deseja mover.

5.  Clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Mover para cima ** ou ** Mover para baixo **.

    If the section you want to move is the first or last section in the
    list, you'll only see one of the move options.

#### Excluir uma seção em um formulário de seção { #delete-a-section-in-a-section-form } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Manutenção ** e clique em ** Conjunto de dados ** \> ** Conjunto de dados **.

2.  In the list, find the data set you want to edit the section form
    for.

3.  Clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Gerenciar seções **.

4.  Na lista, encontre a seção que deseja excluir.

5.  Clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Excluir **.

#### Traduzir uma seção em um formulário de seção { #translate-a-section-in-a-section-form } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Manutenção ** e clique em ** Conjunto de dados ** \> ** Conjunto de dados **.

2.  In the list, find the data set you want to edit the section form
    for.

3.  Clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Traduzir **.

4.  Selecione um local.

5.  Insira as informações necessárias.

6.  Clique em ** Fechar **.

### Gerenciar formulários personalizados { #manage_customform } 

#### Crie um formulário personalizado { #create-a-custom-form } 

You design custom forms in a built-in WYSIWYG HTML editor. If you select
**Source**, you can paste HTML code directly in the editing area. For a
complete guide on how to use the editor, refer to
<http://docs.ckeditor.com/>.


![](resources/images/datasets/data_set_custom_form_create.png)

Para criar um formulário personalizado:

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Manutenção ** e clique em ** Conjunto de dados **.

2.  Na lista, encontre o conjunto de dados ao qual deseja adicionar um formulário personalizado.

3.  Clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Formulário de entrada de dados do projeto **.

4.  Na área de edição, crie o formulário personalizado.

      - Double-click on a object in the left-hand list to insert it in
        the form.

      - If you already have the HTML code for your form, click
        **Source** and paste the code.

5.  Selecione um ** Estilo de exibição de formulário **.

6.  Clique em **Salvar**.

#### Criação de scripts em formulários personalizados { #scripting-in-custom-forms } 

In custom data entry form you can use JavaScript to create dynamic
behaviour and customizations. As an example, you can hide form sections
based on specific user input for data elements, or show specific
information when a form loads.

##### Eventos { #events } 

The DHIS2 data entry module provides a range of events which you can
register for and use to perform actions at certain times. The events are
registered on the document element. The jQuery event object and the data
set identifier are always the first two arguments provided to the
callback functions. The table below provides an overview of the events
and when they are triggered.



Table: Data entry events

| Chave | Descrição | Arguments |
|---|---|---|
| dhis2.de.event.formLoaded | Triggered after the data entry form is rendered, but before data values are set in entry fields. | Event &#124; Data set ID |
| dhis2.de.event.dataValuesLoaded | Triggered after data values are set in entry fields. | Event &#124; Data set ID |
| dhis2.de.event.formReady | Triggered when the data entry form is completely rendered and loaded with all elements. | Event &#124; Data set ID |
| dhis2.de.event.dataValueSaved | Triggered when a data value is saved successfully. | Event &#124; Data set ID &#124; Data value object |
| dhis2.de.event.completed | Triggered when a data set is successfully marked as complete. | Event &#124; Data set ID &#124; Complete registration object |
| dhis2.de.event.validationSuccess | Triggered when validation is done and there were no violations. | Event &#124; Data set ID |

Para se inscrever em um evento:

    <script type="text/javascript">

    dhis2.util.on( 'dhis2.de.event.formReady', function( event, ds ) {
      console.log( 'The form with id: ' + ds + ' is loaded!' );
    } );

    dhis2.util.on( 'dhis2.de.event.dataValueSaved', function( event, ds, dv ) {
      console.log( 'Data value: ' + dv.value + ' was saved with data element: ' + dv.de );
    } );

    dhis2.util.on( 'dhis2.de.event.completed', function( event, ds, cr ) {
      console.log( 'Form was completed for org unit: ' + cr.ou );
    } );

    </script>

> **Note**
>
> Be careful to only use "namespaced" events like the ones in the
> example above and not general ones like "click" as the dhis2.util.on
> method will deregister the event first.

If your function only applies to certain data sets you can use the
supplied data set identifier and shortcut your function for unwanted
data sets like
    this:

    dhis2.de.on( 'dhis2.de.event.validationSuccess', function( event, ds ) {
      if ( $.inArray( ds, ['utXOiGbEj14', 'Re7qzHEThSC'] ) == -1 ) {
        return false;
      }
      console.log( 'Form with id: ' + ds + ' validated successfully!' );
    } );

The identifiers of the input fields in the data entry form is on the
format described below. This format can be used to select the input
fields in your script and perform actions on them:

    <dataelementid>-<optioncomboid>-val

Since the data set identifier is provided for all events a feasible
alternative is to utilize the "files" Web API resource and keep your
callback functions in a single file, where you let the JavaScript code
take action based on which data set is currently loaded.

##### Funções { #functions } 

The DHIS2 data entry module contains JavaScript API functions which can
be accessed from custom data entry forms.

**dhis2.de.api.getSelections**: This function returns a JavaScript
object which contains properties for all dimensions with corresponding
values for the identifiers of the selected options. It contains
properties for "ds" (data set), "pe" (period), "ou" (organisation unit)
and identifiers for all data set categories.

Um exemplo de resposta é o seguinte:

    {
     +  ds: "lyLU2wR22tC",
     +  pe: "201605",
     +  ou: "g8upMTyEZGZ",
     +  LFsZ8v5v7rq: "CW81uF03hvV",
     +  yY2bQYqNt0o: "yMj2MnmNI8L"
     +}

Exemplo de uso de JavaScript desta função:

    var sel = dhis2.de.api.getSelections();
     +var orgUnit = sel["ou"];
     +var partner = sel["LFsZ8v5v7rq"];

### Alterar as configurações de compartilhamento para objetos de metadados { #change-sharing-settings-for-metadata-objects } 

You can assign different sharing settings to metadata objects, for
example organisation units and tracked entity attributes. These sharing
settings control which users and users groups that can view or edit a
metadata object.

Some metadata objects also allows you to change the sharing setting of
data entry for the object. These additional settings control who can
view or enter data in form fields using the metadata.

> **Note**
>
> The default setting is that everyone (**Public access**) can find,
> view and edit metadata objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to modify.

2.  In the object list, click the context menu and select **Sharing
    settings**.

3.  (Optional) Add users or user groups: search for a user or a user
    group and select it. The user or user group is added to the list.

4.  Altere as configurações de compartilhamento dos grupos de acesso que você deseja modificar.

      - **Can edit and view**: The access group can view and edit the
        object.

      - ** Pode visualizar apenas **: O grupo de acesso pode visualizar o objeto.

      - **No access** (only applicable to **Public access**): The public
        won't have access to the object.

5.  Change data sharing settings for the access groups you want to
    modify.

      - **Can capture data**: The access group can view and capture data
        for the object.

      - **Can view data**: The access group can view data for the
        object.

      - **No access**: The access group won't have access to data for
        the object.

6.  Clique em ** Fechar **.

### Excluir objetos de metadados { #delete-metadata-objects } 

> **Note**
>
> You can only delete a data element and other data element objects if
> no data is associated to the data element itself.

> **Warning**
>
> Any data set that you delete from the system is irrevocably lost. All
> data entry forms, and section forms which may have been developed will
> also be removed. Make sure that you have made a backup of your
> database before deleting any data set in case you need to restore it
> at some point in time.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to delete.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Excluir **.

3.  Clique em ** Confirmar **.

### Exibir detalhes de objetos de metadados { #display-details-of-metadata-objects } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to view.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Show
    details**.

### Traduzir objetos de metadados { #translate-metadata-objects } 

DHIS2 provides functionality for translations of database content, for
example data elements, data element groups, indicators, indicator groups
or organisation units. You can translate these elements to any number of
locales. A locale represents a specific geographical, political, or
cultural region.

> **Tip**
>
> To activate a translation, open the **System Settings** app, click \>
> **Appearance** and select a language.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to translate.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Traduzir **.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > If you want to translate an organisation unit level, click
    > directly on the **Translate** icon next to each list item.

3.  Selecione um local.

4.  Digite um ** Nome **, ** Nome curto ** e ** Descrição **.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

## Gerenciar indicadores { #manage_indicator } 

### Sobre indicadores { #about_indicator } 

An indicator is a formula that can consist of multiple data elements,
constants, organisation unit group counts and mathematical operators.
The indicator consist typically of a numerator and denominator. You use
indicators to calculate coverage rates, incidence and other values that
are a result of data element values that have been entered into the
system. Calculated totals do not have a denominator.

> ** Nota **
>
> Você nunca insere os valores do indicador diretamente no DHIS2, você os calcula.

An indicator formula can consist of mathematical operators, for example
plus and minus; functions (see below); and of the following elements:



Table: Indicator elements

| Indicator element | Modelo | Descrição |
|---|---|---|
| Constante | Componente | Constants are numerical values which remain the same for all indicator calculations. This is useful in order to have a single place to change values that might change over time.<br> <br>Constants are applied AFTER data element values have been aggregated. |
| Elementos de dados | Componente | Data elements are substituted by the data value captured for the data element. |
| Days | Operator | "Days" is special operator that always provides the number of days for a given indicator calculation.<br> <br>For example: if you want to calculate the "Percentage of time vaccine refrigerator was non-functional", you could define the numerator as:<br> <br>("Days-"Number of days vaccine refrigerator was available"")/"Days"<br> <br>If the fridge was available 25 days in June, the indicator would be calculated as:<br> <br>(30-25/25)\*100 = 17 %<br> <br>If you want to calculate the total for Quarter 1, the number of days ("Days") would be:<br> <br>31+28+31 = 90<br> <br>The "Days" parameter will always be the number of days in the period of interest. |
| Organisation unit counts | Componente | You can use organisation unit groups in formulas. They will be replaced by the number of organisation units in the group. During aggregation, the organisation units in the group will be intersected with the part of the organisation unit hierarchy being requested.<br> <br>This lets you use the number of public facilities in a specific district in indicators. This is useful for example when you create facility infrastructure surveys and reports. |
| Programas | Componente | Click **Programs** and select a program to view all data elements, attributes and indicators related to a specific program.<br> <br>The program components you include in your formula will have a program tag assigned to them. |

Você pode usar as seguintes funções em uma fórmula de indicador:


Table: Indicator functions

| Indicator Function | Arguments | Descrição |
|---|---|---|
| E se | (boolean-expr, true-expr, false-expr) | Evaluates the boolean expression and if true returns the true expression value, if false returns the false expression value. The arguments must follow the rules for any indicator expression. |
| is | (expr1 in expression [, expression ...]) | Returns true if expr1 is equal to any of the following expressions, otherwise false. |
| é nulo | (element) | Returns true if the element value is missing (null), otherwise false. |
| não é nulo | (element) | Returns true if the element value is not missing (not null), otherwise false. |
| firstNonNull | (element [, element ...]) | Returns the value of the first element that is not missing (not null). Can be provided any number of arguments. Any argument may also be a numeric or string literal, which will be returned if all the previous objects have missing values. |
| maior | (expression [, expression ...]) | Returns the greatest (highest) value of the expressions given. Can be provided any number of arguments. |
| menos | (expression [, expression ...]) | Returns the least (lowest) value of the expressions given. Can be provided any number of arguments. |
| log | (expression [, base ]) | Returns the natural logarithm (base e) of the numeric expression. If an integer is given as a second argument, returns the logarithm using that base. |
| log10 | (expression) | Returns the common logarithm (base 10) of the numeric expression. |
| null | | Returns no result. For example, _if( #{FH8ab5Rog83}<0, null, 1 )_ returns nothing if the data element value is less than 0, otherwise 1. |
| removeZeros | (expression) | Returns nothing if the expression value is 0, otherwise returns the expression value. |
| subExpression | (expression) | Evaluates part of an expression before aggregating. See Indicator SubExpressions below. |
| [periodInYear] | | The number of this period within the year (1, 2, 3, ...). For examples, see the Indicator Year-to-date section below. |
| [yearlyPeriodCount] | | The count of periods of this type within the year. For examples, see the Indicator Year-to-date section below. |
| .aggregationType | (aggregation type) | Overrides the default data element aggregation type for aggregate data (not for program data). |
| .maxDate | (yyyy-mm-dd) | For a data element (not program data), value from periods ending on or before a maximum date. |
| .minDate | (yyyy-mm-dd) | For a data element (not program data), value from periods starting on or after a minimum date. |
| .periodOffset | (integer constant) | Placed after a data value or expression, returns the value from a period offset relative to the reported period. It can be nested. See examples below. |
| .yearToDate() | | Summs the values of all periods from the start of the yaer through the current period. Note that any weekly period is considered to be part of the current year if it has four or more days in the year. For examples, see the Indicator Year-to-date section below. |

Valid aggregation types:

| Tipo de agregação | Descrição |
|---|---|
| AVERAGE | Average value in both period and organisation unit hierarchy |
| AVERAGE_SUM_ORG_UNIT | Average value, sum in organisation unit hierarchy |
| COUNT | Count of values |
| FIRST | First value, sum in organisation unit hierarchy |
| FIRST_AVERAGE_ORG_UNIT | First value, average in organisation unit hierarchy |
| LAST | Last value, sum in organisation unit hierarchy |
| LAST_AVERAGE_ORG_UNIT | Last value, average in organisation unit hierarchy |
| LAST_IN_PERIOD | Last value in period, sum in organisation unit hierarchy
| LAST_IN_PERIOD_AVERAGE_ORG_UNIT | Last value in period, average in organisation unit hierarchy |
| MAX | Maximum value |
| MIN | Minimum value |
| NONE | No aggregation is performed in any dimension |
| SUM | Sum of values in both period and organisation unit hierarchy |
| STDEEV | Standard deviation (population-based) of values |
| VARIANCE | Variance (population-based) of values |

Examples of .aggregationType, .maxDate, .minDate, and .periodOffset functions:

| Indicator expression            | Means                                           |
| ------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------- |
| #{FH8ab5Rog83}.aggregationType(COUNT) | count of  values |
| #{FH8ab5Rog83}.aggregationType(LAST) - #{FH8ab5Rog83}.aggregationType(FIRST) | the difference between first and last values |
| #{FH8ab5Rog83}.maxDate(2021-6-30) | values until 30-Jun-2021 |
| #{FH8ab5Rog83}.minDate(2021-1-1) | values from 1-Jan-2021 onwards |
| #{FH8ab5Rog83}.minDate(2021-1-1)<br />.maxDate(2021-6-30) | values between 1-Jan-2021 and 30-Jun-2021 |
| #{FH8ab5Rog83}.periodOffset(-1) | value from the period before |
| #{FH8ab5Rog83}.periodOffset(+1) | value from the period after  |
| #{FH8ab5Rog83}.periodOffset(1)  | value from the period after  |
| #{FH8ab5Rog83} - 2 * D{IpHINAT79UW.uf3svrmp8Oj}.periodOffset(-1)  | data element FH8ab5Rog83 from the reported period minus twice program data element IpHINAT79UW.uf3svrmp8Oj from the period before |
| ( #{FH8ab5Rog83} - <br /> #{QOlfIKgNJ3D2} ).periodOffset(-2) | data element FH8ab5Rog83 from 2 periods before minus data element QOlfIKgNJ3D2 from 2 periods before |
| #{FH8ab5Rog83}.periodOffset(-2) + <br /> #{FH8ab5Rog83}.periodOffset(-1) | data element FH8ab5Rog83 from 2 periods before plus the value from 1 period before |
| ( #{FH8ab5Rog83}.periodOffset(-1) + <br /> #{FH8ab5Rog83} ).periodOffset(-1) | data element FH8ab5Rog83 from 2 periods before plus the value from 1 period before (note that the functions are nested) |

### Indicator SubExpressions { #indicator_subexpressions }

When fetching data for a data element, indicators usually aggregate the data before evaluating it in the expression. For example, consider the indicator expression:

    if( #{nYahlae7fe6} > 10, 1, 0 )

If the data element has aggregation type SUM, this will sum all the values of the data element nYahlae7fe6 for the relevant period and then test to see if the sum is greater than 10. It will return 1 if the sum of all the data element values is greater than 10, otherwise it will return 0.

Sometimes you may wish to evaluate a data value in an expression before aggregating it. For example, you may want to show at a district level how many facilities within the district have a data value greater than 10. This can be done by using the `subExpression` function as follows:

    subExpression( if( #{nYahlae7fe6} > 10, 1, 0 ) )

This will test each data element value to see if it is greater than 10. If it is greater than 10, the _if_ statement will return 1, otherwise 0. Then, assuming that data element nYahlae7fe6 has aggregation type SUM, it will sum the 1's and 0's, resulting in a count of how many data elements had a value greater than 10.

SubExpression notes:

1. An example such as the one above will sum the 1's and 0's only if the data element has an aggregation type of SUM. If the data element has a different aggregation type and you want to sum the 1's and 0's, you can override the aggregation type inside the subexpression by using the `.aggregationType()` function as follows:

       subExpression( if( #{nYahlae7fe6} > 10, 1, 0 ) ).aggregationType(SUM)

2. A SubExpression may reference only one data element, but it may reference it multiple times. For example:

       subExpression( if( #{nYahlae7fe6} > 10 && #{nYahlae7fe6} <= 20, 1, 0 ) )

3. A SubExpression may reference a data element with a category option combination and/or an attribute option combination, but it must be exactly the same reference each time. For example:

       subExpression( if( #{nYahlae7fe6.beec4Dewah8} > 10 && #{nYahlae7fe6.beec4Dewah8} <= 20, 1, 0 ) )

4. If you wish to evaluate an expression before aggregating that involves other types of data such as program data, or that involves more than one data element, category option combination or attribute option combination, you can use a Predictor to do so and store the result as a different data element. Then you can reference the predicted data element in an indicator or directly in analytics.

### Indicator Year-to-date { #indicator_yeartodate }

Indicators can compute year-to-date values using the expression elements _yearToDate()_, _[periodInYear]_, and _[yearlyPeriodCount]_.

In the examples below, #{a} can be: #{dataElementUID}, or any valid indicator expression item that returns a data value such as  #{dataElementUID.catOptionComboUid}, I{programIndicatorUID}, N{indicatorUID}, etc.

| Indicator expression | Means |
| --- | --- |
| #{a} | current period value |
| #{a}.yearToDate() | sum of values year to date. For example, if the period is March gives the value for Jan+Feb+Mar  |
| #{a}.yearToDate() / [periodInYear] | average year-to-date value. For example, if the period is March gives the value for Jan+Feb+Mar / 3 |
| #{a} - <nobr>#{a}.yearToDate()</nobr> / [periodInYear] | difference between current period and average year to date |
| #{b} * [periodInYear] / [yearlyPeriodCount] | If #{b} represents the annual target population (for example, the number of people who should be vaccinated during this year), then this can show the number of people who should be vaccinated by the current period. For example, in February this gives #{b} * 2 / 12.

#### Notes on [yearlyPeriodCount] { #notes-on-yearlyperiodcount } 

For monthly periods, [yearlyPeriodCount] is always 12, for quarters is always 4, etc. There are two advantages of using [yearlyPeriodCount] rather than hard-coding numbers like 12 or 4:

1. For weekly periods [yearlyPeriodCount] will be 52 or 53 depending on the year. For biweekly periods it will be 26 or 27.

2. If the user chooses a different period type in analytics, [periodInYear] and [yearlyPeriodCount] will adjust accordingly. For example if monthly data is collected, the user can choose to report monthly where [periodInYear] is 1: Jan, 2: Feb, ..., and [yearlyPeriodCount] is 12; or the user can report quarterly where [periodInYear] is 1: Q1, 2: Q2, ..., and [yearlyPeriodCount] is 4.

#### Notes on missing data { #notes-on-missing-data } 

.yearToDate() returns a value if there is any data in the year before or during the period.
For example, if the values of #{a} are:

    Jan: (no data)
    Feb: 1
    Mar: 2
    Apr: (no data)
    May: 3
    Jun: (no data)

then the values of #{a}.yearToDate() are:

    Jan: (no data)
    Feb: 1
    Mar: 3
    Apr: 3
    May: 6
    Jun: 6

 <br/>

No aplicativo ** Manutenção **, você gerencia os seguintes objetos indicadores:



Table: Indicator objects in the Maintenance app

| Object type | Available functions |
|---|---|
| Indicador | Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate |
| Indicator type | Create, edit, clone, delete, show details and translate |
| Indicator group | Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate |
| Indicator group set | Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate |

### Fluxo de Trabalho { #workflow_indicator } 

1.  Crie tipos de indicadores.

2.  Crie indicadores.

3.  Crie grupos de indicadores.

4.  Crie conjuntos de grupos de indicadores.

### Crie ou edite um tipo de indicador { #create_indicator_type } 

![](resources/images/maintenance/indicator_type_create.png)

Indicator types define a factor that is applied during aggregation.
Indicator values that are calculated during a data mart export or report
table generation process will appear properly formatted, and will
therefore not require an additional multiplier (for example 100 in the
case of percent) for the values to appear correctly formatted.

> **Note**
>
> As of version 2.4 of DHIS2, the "Calculated data element" object has
> been deprecated. Instead, you can create a calculated data element by
> creating an indicator type with a factor of "1" and by setting the
> "Number" option to "Yes". The effect of setting the "Number" option to
> "Yes" will be that the indicator will effectively not have a
> denominator. You will therefore only be able to define a numerator,
> which will serve as the formula of the calculated data element.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Indicator** \> **Indicator
    type**.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  In the **Name** field, type the name of the indicator type, for
    example "Per cent", "Per thousand", "Per ten thousand".

4.  Digite um ** Fator **.

    The factor is the numeric factor that will be multiplied by the
    indicator formula during the calculation of the indicator.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Crie ou edite um indicador { #create_indicator } 

![](resources/images/maintenance/indicator_create.png)

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Indicator** \>
    **Indicator**.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  In the **Name** field, type the full name of the indicator, for
    example "Incidence of confirmed malaria cases per 1000 population".

4.  In the **Short name** field, type an abbreviated name of the
    indicator, for example "Inc conf. malaria per 1000 pop".

    The short name must be less than or equal to 25 characters,
    including spaces.

5.  (Opcional) No campo ** Código **, atribua um código.

    Em muitos países, os indicadores recebem um código.

5.  (Opcional) No campo ** Cor **, atribua uma cor para reenviar o indicador.

5.  (Opcional) No campo ** Ícone **, atribua um ícone para ilustrar o significado do indicador.

6.  In the **Description** field, type a brief, informative description
    of the indicator and how it is calculated.

7.  If you want to apply an annualization factor during the calculation
    of the indicator, select **Annualized**.

    Typically, an annualized indicator's numerator is multiplied by a
    factor of 12, and the denominator is for instance a yearly
    population figure. This allows for monthly coverage values to be
    calculated with yearly population figures.

8.  Selecione o número de ** decimais na saída de dados **.

9.  Selecione um ** tipo de indicador **.

    This field determines a factor that will automatically be applied
    during the calculation of the indicator. Possible choices are
    determined by the indicator types. For example, a "Percent"
    indicator will automatically be multiplied by a factor of 100 when
    exported to the data mart, so that it will display as a percentage.

10. (Opcional) Atribua uma ou várias ** Legendas **.

11. In the **URL** field, enter a link, for example a link to an
    indicator registry, where a full metadata description of the
    indicator can be made available.

12. (Optional) Enter a **Category option combination for aggregate data
    export.**.

    You use this setting to map aggregated data exported as raw data to
    another server. Typically you do this type of data exchange mapping
    when you want to create anonymous aggregated data from patient data
    recorded in programs (event data).

13. (Optional) Enter an **Attribute option combination for aggregate
    data export.**.

    You use this setting to map aggregated data exported as raw data to
    another server. Typically you do this type of data exchange mapping
    when you want to create anonymous aggregated data from patient data
    recorded in programs (event data).

14. If applicable, enter custom attributes values, for example
    **Classification** or **Collection method**.

    > **Note**
    >
    > You create custom attributes in the **Maintenance** app: **Other**
    > \> **Attributes**.

15. Clique em ** Editar numerador **.

    1.  Digite uma descrição clara do numerador.

    2.  Define the numerator by double-clicking components in the
        right-hand field. The components then appears as part of the
        formula in the left-hand field. Add mathematical operators by
        double-clicking the icons below the left-hand field.

        You formula must be mathematically valid. This includes correct
        use of parentheses when necessary.

    3.  Clique em ** Concluído ** para salvar todas as alterações no numerador.

16. Clique em ** Editar denominador **.

    1.  Digite uma descrição clara do denominador.

    2.  Define the denominator by double-clicking components in the
        right-hand field. The components then appears as part of the
        formula in the left-hand field. Add mathematical operators by
        double-clicking the icons below the left-hand field.

        You formula must be mathematically valid. This includes correct
        use of parentheses when necessary.

    3.  Clique em ** Concluído ** para salvar todas as alterações no denominador.

17. If applicable, select compulsory indicator group sets, for example
    **Human resources**.

    > **Note**
    >
    > You'll only see indicator group sets in this form if you've
    > created them and set them to **Compulsory**.
    >
    > You create indicator group sets in the **Maintenance** app:
    > **Indicator** \> **Indicator group set**.

18. Clique em **Salvar**.

### Crie ou edite um grupo de indicadores { #create_indicator_group } 

![](resources/images/maintenance/indicator_group_create.png)

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Indicator** \> **Indicator
    group**.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  Digite um nome.

4.  Selecione indicadores e atribua-os.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Criar ou editar um conjunto de grupos de indicadores { #create_indicator_group_set } 

![](resources/images/maintenance/indicator_group_set_create.png)

Indicator group sets create combined groups of similar indicators. For
example, you might have a group of indicators called "Malaria" and
"Leishmaniasis". Both of these groups could be combined into a group set
called "Vector-borne diseases". Indicator groups sets are used during
analysis of data to combine similar themes of indicators.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Indicators** \> **Indicator
    group**.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  Preencher o formulário:

    1.  **Nome**
2.  **Nome curto**
    3.  **Código**
4.  **Descrição**
    3.  **Obrigatório**

4.  Selecione grupos de indicadores e atribua-os.

    Available indicator groups are displayed in the left panel.
    Indicator groups that are currently members of the indicator group
    set are displayed in the right hand panel.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Clonar objetos de metadados { #clone_metadata } 

Cloning a data element or other objects can save time when you create
many similar objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to clone.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Clonar **.

3.  Modifique as opções que você deseja.

4.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Alterar as configurações de compartilhamento para objetos de metadados { #change-sharing-settings-for-metadata-objects } 

You can assign different sharing settings to metadata objects, for
example organisation units and tracked entity attributes. These sharing
settings control which users and users groups that can view or edit a
metadata object.

Some metadata objects also allows you to change the sharing setting of
data entry for the object. These additional settings control who can
view or enter data in form fields using the metadata.

> **Note**
>
> The default setting is that everyone (**Public access**) can find,
> view and edit metadata objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to modify.

2.  In the object list, click the context menu and select **Sharing
    settings**.

3.  (Optional) Add users or user groups: search for a user or a user
    group and select it. The user or user group is added to the list.

4.  Altere as configurações de compartilhamento dos grupos de acesso que você deseja modificar.

      - **Can edit and view**: The access group can view and edit the
        object.

      - ** Pode visualizar apenas **: O grupo de acesso pode visualizar o objeto.

      - **No access** (only applicable to **Public access**): The public
        won't have access to the object.

5.  Change data sharing settings for the access groups you want to
    modify.

      - **Can capture data**: The access group can view and capture data
        for the object.

      - **Can view data**: The access group can view data for the
        object.

      - **No access**: The access group won't have access to data for
        the object.

6.  Clique em ** Fechar **.

### Excluir objetos de metadados { #delete-metadata-objects } 

> **Note**
>
> You can only delete a data element and other data element objects if
> no data is associated to the data element itself.

> **Warning**
>
> Any data set that you delete from the system is irrevocably lost. All
> data entry forms, and section forms which may have been developed will
> also be removed. Make sure that you have made a backup of your
> database before deleting any data set in case you need to restore it
> at some point in time.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to delete.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Excluir **.

3.  Clique em ** Confirmar **.

### Exibir detalhes de objetos de metadados { #display-details-of-metadata-objects } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to view.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Show
    details**.

### Traduzir objetos de metadados { #translate-metadata-objects } 

DHIS2 provides functionality for translations of database content, for
example data elements, data element groups, indicators, indicator groups
or organisation units. You can translate these elements to any number of
locales. A locale represents a specific geographical, political, or
cultural region.

> **Tip**
>
> To activate a translation, open the **System Settings** app, click \>
> **Appearance** and select a language.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to translate.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Traduzir **.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > If you want to translate an organisation unit level, click
    > directly on the **Translate** icon next to each list item.

3.  Selecione um local.

4.  Digite um ** Nome **, ** Nome curto ** e ** Descrição **.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

## Gerenciar unidades de organização { #manage_organisation_unit } 

Nesta seção, você aprenderá como:

  - Create a new organisation unit and build up the organisation unit
    hierarchy

  - Create organisation unit groups, group sets, and assign organisation
    units to them

  - Modifique a hierarquia da unidade organizacional

### Sobre unidades organizacionais { #about_organisation_unit } 

The organisation unit hierarchy defines the organisation structure of
DHIS2, for example how health facilities, administrative areas and other
geographical areas are arranged with respect to each other. It is the
*where* dimension of DHIS2, similar to how periods represent the *when*
dimension.

The organisation unit hierarchy is built up by parent-child relations.
In DHIS2, each of these nodes is an organisation unit. A country might
for example have eight provinces, and each province might have a number
of districts as children. Normally, the lowest levels consist of
facilities where data is collected. Data collecting facilities can also
be located at higher levels, for example national or provincial
hospitals. Therefore, you can create skewed organisation trees in DHIS2.

  - Você só pode ter uma hierarquia organizacional ao mesmo tempo.

  - Você pode ter qualquer número de níveis em uma hierarquia.

    Typically national organisation hierarchies in public health have
    four to six levels.

  - You can create additional classifications by using organisation
    groups and organisation group sets.

    For example to create parallel administrative boundaries to the
    health care sector.

  - It is recommended to use organisation unit groups to create a
    non-geographical hierarchy.

  - An organisation unit can only be a member of a single organisation
    unit group within an organisation unit group set.

  - An organisation unit group can be part of multiple organisation unit
    group sets.

  - The organisation unit hierarchy is the main vehicle for data
    aggregation on the geographical dimension.

  - When you close an organisation unit, you can't register or edit
    events to this organisation unit in the **Event Capture** and
    **Tracker Capture** apps.

> **Important**
>
> You can change the organisation unit hierarchy after you've created
> it, even organisation units that collect data. However, DHIS2 always
> uses the latest hierarchy for data aggregation. So if you change the
> hierarchy, you loose the temporal representation of the hierarchy
> across time.
>
> District A is sub-divided into District B and District C. Facilities
> which belonged to District A are reassigned to District B and C. Any
> historical data, which you entered before the split occurred, is still
> registered as belonging to District B and C, not to the obsolete
> District A.

In the **Maintenance** app, you manage the following organisation unit
objects:



Table: Organisation unit objects in the Maintenance app

| Object type | Available functions |
|---|---|
| Unidade organizacional | Create, edit, clone, delete, show details and translate |
| Organisation unit group | Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate |
| Organisation unit group set | Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate |
| Organisation unit level | Edit and translate |
| Hierarchy operations | Move organisation units |

### Fluxo de Trabalho { #workflow_organisation_unit } 

O fluxo de trabalho recomendado é:

1.  Crie unidades de organização.

2.  Crie grupos de unidades de organização.

3.  Crie conjuntos de grupos de unidades de organização.

### Crie ou edite uma unidade organizacional { #create_organisation_unit } 

![](resources/images/orgunits/create_new_orgunit.png)

You add organisation units to the hierarchy one by one, either as a root
unit or as a child of a selected organisation unit. You can only have
one root unit.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Organisation unit** \>
    **Organisation unit**.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  Select which organisation unit your new organisation unit will
    belong to:

    1.  Clique em ** Unidade de organização pai **.

    2.  In the organisation unit tree, locate the parent organisation
        unit and select it. Your selection is marked in yellow.

        > **Tip**
        >
        > Click the arrows to expand the organisation unit tree.

    3.  Clique em ** Selecionar **.

4.  Insira um ** Nome ** da unidade organizacional.

    Cada unidade organizacional deve ter um nome exclusivo.

5.  Insira um ** Nome abreviado ** para a unidade organizacional.

    Typically, the short name is an abbreviation of the full
    organisation unit name. This attribute is often used in reports to
    display the name of the organisation unit, where space is limited.

6.  (Opcional) Atribua um ** Código **.

    Em muitos países, as unidades organizacionais recebem um código.

7.  (Optional) Upload a / remove the **Organisation unit image**

8.  (Opcional) Digite uma ** Descrição ** da unidade organizacional.

9.  Selecione uma ** Data de abertura **.

    The opening dates control which organisation units that existed at a
    point in time, for example when analysing historical data.

10. Se aplicável, selecione uma ** Data de fechamento **.

11. In the **Comment** field, enter any additional information that you
    would like to add.

12. (Optional) In the **URL** field, enter a link to an external web
    site that has additional information about the organisation unit.

13. Insira as informações de contato:

      - Pessoa de contato

      - Endereço

      - O email

      - Número de telefone

14. (Opcional) Insira ** Latitude ** e ** Longitude **.

    You must have latitude and longitude values to create maps in the
    **Maps** app. Then your organisation units can be represented as
    points on a map, for example a health facility. Without this
    information, the **Maps** app will not work.

    It might be more efficient to import coordinates later as a batch
    job for all organisation units using the **Import-Export** app. You
    also use the **Import-Export** app to create polygons. A polygon is
    an organisation unit that represent an administrative boundary.

15. Se aplicável, selecione ** Conjuntos de dados ** e atribua-os.

    > **Note**
    >
    > You control whether a user should be able to assign data sets to
    > an organisation unit in the **System Settings** app:
    >
    > Open the **System Settings** app, click **Access** and select
    > **Allow assigning object to related objects during add or
    > update**.

16. Se aplicável, selecione ** Programas ** e atribua-os.

    > **Note**
    >
    > You control whether a user should be able to assign programs to an
    > organisation unit in the **System Settings** app:
    >
    > Open the **System Settings** app, click **Access** and select
    > **Allow assigning object to related objects during add or
    > update**.

17. If applicable, enter custom attributes values, for example **HR
    identifier**.

    > **Note**
    >
    > You configure the custom attributes in the **Maintenance** app:
    >
    > Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Other** \> **Attribute**.

18. Clique em **Salvar**.

### Criar ou editar um grupo de unidades organizacionais { #create_organisation_unit_group } 

Organisation unit groups allow you to classify related organisation
units into a common theme. You can for example group all organisation
units that are hospitals in an **Hospital** group.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Organisation unit** \>
    **Organisation unit group**.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  Preencher o formulário:

    1.  **Name**: Provide a precise, unique and descriptive name for the
        organisation unit group.

    2.  **Short name**: The short name should be less than 25
        characters. Typically, the short name is an abbreviation of the
        full organisation unit name. This attribute is used in certain
        places in DHIS2 where space is limited.

    3.  **Código**

    4.  **Symbol**: Select a symbol which will be used to display the
        organisation unit (points only) when the layer is displayed in
        the **Maps** app.

4.  In the organisation tree, click the organisation units you want to
    add to the organisation unit group.

    You can locate an organisation unit in the tree by expanding the
    branches (click on the arrow symbol), or by searching for it by
    name.

    As unidades de organização selecionadas são exibidas em laranja.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Criar ou editar um conjunto de grupos de unidades organizacionais { #create_organisation_unit_group_set } 

Organisation unit group sets allows you to create additional
classifications of organisation units. The group sets create new
dimensions so that you can make a more detailed data analysis. You an
easily filter, organise or aggregate data by groups within a group set.

  - Você pode ter qualquer número de conjuntos de grupos de unidades de organização.

  - The default organisation unit group sets are **Type** and
    **Ownership**.

  - An organisation unit can only be a member of a single organisation
    unit group within an organisation unit group set.

  - An organisation unit group can be part of multiple organisation unit
    group sets.

  - You can define whether an organisation unit group set is compulsory
    or not, which will affect the completeness of the data. Compulsory
    means that all organisation units must be member of a group in that
    group set.

> **Note**
>
> In the **Data integrity** part of the **Data administration** app you
> can verify if you've accidentally assigned the same organisation unit
> to multiple groups within the same group set. In this app you also
> find information about organisation units that are not members of a
> compulsory organisation unit group set.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Organisation unit** \>
    **Organisation unit group set**.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  Preencha:

    1.  **Name**: Provide a precise name for the organisation unit group
        set.

    2.  **Short name**: Provide a short name for the organisation unit group
        set.

    3.  **Código**

    4.  **Description**: Describe what the organisation unit group set
        measures or captures.

4.  If you want all organisation units to be members of a group within
    the group set, select **Compulsory**.

5.  (Opcional) Selecione ** Dimensão de dados **.

        If you select **Data dimension**, the group set will be available to the analytics as another dimension, in addition to the standard dimensions of “Period” and “Organisation unit”.

6.  (Opcional) Selecione ** Incluir sub-hierarquia na análise **.

    If you select this, a sub-organisation unit will inherit the
    organisation unit group property from its closest "parent"
    organisation unit. Any property on the sub-organisation unit will
    override the inherit value.

    If an organisation unit have no associated organisation unit group,
    the organisation unit can inherit its closest parent's organisation
    unit group. If none of the parent organisation unit groups have an
    organisation unit group for a given org unit group set, the result
    will still be "blank", but if at least one parent has an
    organisation unit group, sub-organisation unit will inherit it.

    include subhierarchy in analytics" is enabled, which means the org
    units inherit their closest parents org unit group IF the org unit
    is white (no org unit group associated with it).

7.  Selecione grupos de unidades de organização e atribua-os.

    In the left-hand list, you find the available organisation unit
    groups. Use the arrows to move selected groups between the two
    lists.

    If there are no organisation unit groups in the left-hand list,
    click **Add new**. In the form that opens, create the organisation
    units group you need. When you're done, click **Refresh values**.

    > **Note**
    >
    > An organisation unit can only be a member of a single organisation
    > unit group within an organisation unit group set.

8.  Click
**Save**.

![](resources/images/implementation_guide/organisation_unit_hiearchy.png)

You want to analyse data based on the ownership of the facilities. All
facilities have an owner so you need to make sure that all organisation
units get this classification. To do that you can use the **Compulsory**
option:

1.  Create a group for each ownership type, for example "MoH", "Private"
    and "Faith-based".

2.  Atribua todas as instalações do banco de dados a um desses grupos.

3.  Create an organisation unit group set called "Ownership" and select
    **Compulsory**.

4.  Assign the organisation unit groups "MoH", "Private" and
    "Faith-based" to the "Ownership" organisation group
    set.

![](resources/images/maintenance/analytics-include-org-unit-subhierarchy.png)

![](resources/images/maintenance/include-subhierarchy-analytics.png)

Group you organisation unit in two ways and aggregate data on these two
parallel hierarchies

Use para agregar dados (apenas em aplicativos de análise)

An additional setting to the organisation unit group set, creates a
dynamic "membership" to a organisation unit group set.

Você não muda a hierarquia da unidade organizacional

Escalável e dinâmico

Inclusão dinâmica de hierarquia

Classificação adicional dinâmica

### Atribuir nomes a níveis de unidade organizacional { #name_organisation_unit_level } 

When you add children to an organisation unit, DHIS2 automatically
creates a new organisation unit level if necessary. The system also
assigns a generic name to this level, for example "Level 5". You can
replace the generic name with a contextual name, for example "Country",
"Province", "District" or "Health Facility". DHIS2 uses the contextual
names anywhere levels are referred to, for example in the **Maps** app.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Organisation unit** \>
    **Organisation unit level**.

    The loading time of the list depends on the depth of the
    organisation unit hierarchy tree.

2.  Para os níveis de unidade de organização que você deseja modificar, digite um nome.

3.  Selecione o número de níveis offline.

    > **Note**
    >
    > You configure the default value in the **System Settings** app:
    >
    > Open the **System Settings** app, click **General** and select a
    > level in the **Max offline organisation unit levels** list.

4.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Mover unidades organizacionais dentro de uma hierarquia { #move_organisation_unit } 

You can move organisation units within in the hierarchy by changing the
parent of a selected organisation unit.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Organisation unit** \>
    **Hierarchy operations**.

2.  In the left-hand hierarchy tree, select the organisation unit(s) you
    want to move.

    > **Note**
    >
    > If the selected organisation unit is has sub-organisation units,
    > all of them move to the new parent organisation unit.

3.  In the right-hand hierarchy tree, select which organisation unit you
    want to move the selected organisation unit(s) to.

4.  Click **Move x organisation units**, where x stands for the number
    of organisation units you have selected.

    Your changes are immediately reflected in the left-hand side
    hierarchy tree.

### Fechar uma unidade organizacional { #close_organisation_unit } 

When you close an organisation unit, you can't register or edit events
to this organisation unit in the **Event Capture** and **Tracker
Capture** apps.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Organisation unit** \>
    **Organisation unit**.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Editar **.

3.  Selecione uma ** Data de fechamento **.

4.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Clonar objetos de metadados { #clone_metadata } 

Cloning a data element or other objects can save time when you create
many similar objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to clone.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Clonar **.

3.  Modifique as opções que você deseja.

4.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Alterar as configurações de compartilhamento para objetos de metadados { #change-sharing-settings-for-metadata-objects } 

You can assign different sharing settings to metadata objects, for
example organisation units and tracked entity attributes. These sharing
settings control which users and users groups that can view or edit a
metadata object.

Some metadata objects also allows you to change the sharing setting of
data entry for the object. These additional settings control who can
view or enter data in form fields using the metadata.

> **Note**
>
> The default setting is that everyone (**Public access**) can find,
> view and edit metadata objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to modify.

2.  In the object list, click the context menu and select **Sharing
    settings**.

3.  (Optional) Add users or user groups: search for a user or a user
    group and select it. The user or user group is added to the list.

4.  Altere as configurações de compartilhamento dos grupos de acesso que você deseja modificar.

      - **Can edit and view**: The access group can view and edit the
        object.

      - ** Pode visualizar apenas **: O grupo de acesso pode visualizar o objeto.

      - **No access** (only applicable to **Public access**): The public
        won't have access to the object.

5.  Change data sharing settings for the access groups you want to
    modify.

      - **Can capture data**: The access group can view and capture data
        for the object.

      - **Can view data**: The access group can view data for the
        object.

      - **No access**: The access group won't have access to data for
        the object.

6.  Clique em ** Fechar **.

### Excluir objetos de metadados { #delete-metadata-objects } 

> **Note**
>
> You can only delete a data element and other data element objects if
> no data is associated to the data element itself.

> **Warning**
>
> Any data set that you delete from the system is irrevocably lost. All
> data entry forms, and section forms which may have been developed will
> also be removed. Make sure that you have made a backup of your
> database before deleting any data set in case you need to restore it
> at some point in time.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to delete.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Excluir **.

3.  Clique em ** Confirmar **.

### Exibir detalhes de objetos de metadados { #display-details-of-metadata-objects } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to view.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Show
    details**.

### Traduzir objetos de metadados { #translate-metadata-objects } 

DHIS2 provides functionality for translations of database content, for
example data elements, data element groups, indicators, indicator groups
or organisation units. You can translate these elements to any number of
locales. A locale represents a specific geographical, political, or
cultural region.

> **Tip**
>
> To activate a translation, open the **System Settings** app, click \>
> **Appearance** and select a language.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to translate.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Traduzir **.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > If you want to translate an organisation unit level, click
    > directly on the **Translate** icon next to each list item.

3.  Selecione um local.

4.  Digite um ** Nome **, ** Nome curto ** e ** Descrição **.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

## Manage validation rules { #manage_validation_rule } 

### Sobre regras de validação { #about_validation_rule } 

A validation rule is based on an expression. The expression defines a
relationship between data element values. The expression forms a
condition with certain logical criteria.

A expressão consiste em:

  - Um lado esquerdo

  - Um lado direito

  - Uma operadora

A validation rule asserting that the total number of vaccines given to
infants is less than or equal to the total number of infants.

The left and right sides must return numeric values.

In the **Maintenance** app, you manage the following validation rule
objects:


| Object type | What you can do |
|---|---|
| Validation rule | Create, edit, clone, delete, show details, and translate |
| Validation rule group | Create, edit, clone, delete, share, show details, and translate |
| Validation notification | Create, edit, clone, delete, show details, and translate |

#### Sobre janelas de correr { #sliding_windows } 

You can use sliding windows to group data *across multiple periods* as
opposed to selecting data for *a single period*. Sliding windows have a
size, that is to say, the number of days to cover, a starting point and
an end point. The example below shows disease surveillance data:.

  - The data in the orange section, selects data based on the current
    period. There is a threshold, which is calculated once for each week
    or period, and this is shown in the "Result" section.

  - The data in the blue section is the sliding window. It selects data
    from the past 7 days. The "Result" shows the total number of
    confirmed cases of a disease.

  - The validation rule makes sure users are notified when the total
    number of cases breaks the threshold for the period.

![](resources/images/maintenance/validation_rules_sliding_window.gif)



Table: Different behaviour of validation rules

| With sliding windows | Without sliding windows |
|---|---|
| Used only for event data. | Used for event data and aggregate data. |
| Data selection is based on a fixed number of days (periodType). | Data selection is always based on a period. |
| The position of the sliding window is always *relative to* the period being compared. | Data is always selected for the *same period* as the period being compared. |

See also: How to use sliding windows when you're [Creating or editing a
validation
rule](https://docs.dhis2.org/master/en/user/html/manage_validation_rule.html#create_validation_rule).

#### Sobre grupos de regras de validação { #about-validation-rule-groups } 

A validation rule group allows you to group related validation rules.
When you run a *[validation rule
analysis](https://docs.dhis2.org/master/en/user/html/validation_rule_analysis.html)*,
you can choose to run all of the validation rules in your system, or
just the validation rules in one group.

#### Sobre notificações de validação { #validation_notifications } 

You can configure a validation rule analysis to automatically send
notifications about validation errors to selected user groups. These
messages are called *validation notifications*. They are sent via the
internal DHIS2 messaging system.

You can send validation rule notifications as individual messages or as
message summaries. This is useful, for example, if you want to send
individual messages for high-priority disease outbreaks, and summaries
for low-priority routine data validation errors.

#### About validation rule functions { #about-validation-rule-functions } 

You can use the following functions in a validation rule left side
or right side:



Table: Validation Rule functions

| Validation Rule Function | Arguments | Descrição |
|---|---|---|
| E se | (boolean-expr, true-expr, false-expr) | Evaluates the boolean expression and if true returns the true expression value, if false returns the false expression value. The arguments must follow the rules for any indicator expression. |
| is | (expr1 in expression [, expression ...]) | Returns true if expr1 is equal to any of the following expressions, otherwise false. |
| é nulo | (element) | Returns true if the element value is missing (null), otherwise false. |
| não é nulo | (element) | Returns true if the element value is not missing (not null), otherwise false. |
| firstNonNull | (element [, element ...]) | Returns the value of the first element that is not missing (not null). Can be provided any number of arguments. Any argument may also be a numeric or string literal, which will be returned if all the previous objects have missing values. |
| maior | (expression [, expression ...]) | Returns the greatest (highest) value of the expressions given. Can be provided any number of arguments. |
| menos | (expression [, expression ...]) | Returns the least (lowest) value of the expressions given. Can be provided any number of arguments. |
| log | (expression [, base ]) | Returns the natural logarithm (base e) of the numeric expression. If an integer is given as a second argument, returns the logarithm using that base. |
| log10 | (expression) | Returns the common logarithm (base 10) of the numeric expression. |
| null | | Returns no result. For example, _if( #{FH8ab5Rog83}<0, null, 1 )_ returns nothing if the data element value is less than 0, otherwise 1. |
| orgUnit.ancestor | (orgUnitUid [, orgUnitUid ...]) | Returns true if the organisation unit is a descendant of any of the (1 or more) organisation units, otherwise false. |
| orgUnit.dataSet | (dataSetUid [, dataSetUid ...]) | Returns true if the organisation unit is assigned to any of the (1 or more) data sets, otherwise false. |
| orgUnit.group | (ouGroupUid [, ouGroupUid ...]) | Returns true if the organisation unit is a member of any of the (1 or more) organisation unit groups, otherwise false. |
| orgUnit.program | (programUid [, programUid ...]) | Returns true if the organisation unit is assigned to any of the (1 or more) programs, otherwise false. |
| removeZeros | (expression) | Returns nothing if the expression value is 0, otherwise returns the expression value. |

### Crie ou edite uma regra de validação { #create_validation_rule } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Validation** \>
    **Validation rule**.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  Digite um ** Nome **.

    O nome deve ser único entre as regras de validação.

4.  (Opcional) No campo ** Código **, atribua um código.

5.  (Opcional) Digite uma ** Descrição **.

6.  Selecione uma ** Importância **: ** Alta **, ** Média ** ou ** Baixa **.

7.  Selecione um ** Tipo de período **.

8.  Select an **Operator**: **Compulsory pair**, **Equal to**,
    **Exclusive pair**, **Greater than**, **Greater than or equal to**
    or **Not equal to**.

    The **Compulsory pair** operator allows to require that data values
    must be entered for a form for both left and right sides of the
    expression, or for neither side. This means that you can require
    that if one field in a form is filled, then one or more other fields
    must also be filled.

    The **Exclusive pair** allows to assert that if any value exist on
    the left side then there should be no values on the right side (or
    vice versa). This means that data elements which compose the rule on
    either side should be mutually exclusive from each other, for a
    given time period / organisation unit /attribute option combo.

9.  Crie o lado esquerdo da expressão:

    1.  Clique em ** Lado esquerdo **.

    2.  Select **Sliding window** if you want to view data relative to
        the period you are comparing. See also [About validation
        rules](https://docs.dhis2.org/master/en/user/html/manage_validation_rule.html#about_validation_rule).

    3.  Select a **Missing value strategy**. This selection sets how the
        system evaluates a validation rule if data is missing.


        | Option | Description |
        |---|---|
        | Skip if any value is missing | The validation rule will be skipped if any of the values which compose the expression are missing. This is the default option.<br>         <br>Always select this option you use the **Exclusive pair** or **Compulsory pair** operator. |
        | Skip if all values are missing | The validation rule will be skipped only if all of the operands which compose it are missing. |
        | Never skip | The validation rule will never be skipped in case of missing data, and all missing operands will be treated effectively as a zero. |

    4.  Type a **Description**.

    5.  Build an expression based on the available data elements,
        program objects, organisation units, counts and constants.

        In the right pane, double-click the data objects you want to
        include in the expression. Combine with the mathematical
        operators located below the left pane.

    6.  Click **Save**.

10. Crie o lado direito da expressão:

    1.  Clique em ** Lado direito **.

    2.  Select a **Missing value strategy**. This selection sets how the
        system evaluates a validation rule if data is missing.


        | Option | Description |
        |---|---|
        | Skip if any value is missing | The validation rule will be skipped if any of the values which compose the expression are missing. This is the default option.<br>         <br>Always select this option you use the **Exclusive pair** or **Compulsory pair** operator. |
        | Skip if all values are missing | The validation rule will be skipped only if all of the operands which compose it are missing. |
        | Never skip | The validation rule will never be skipped in case of missing data, and all missing operands will be treated effectively as a zero. |

    3.  Select **Sliding window** if you want to view data relative to
        the period you are comparing. See also [About validation
        rules](https://docs.dhis2.org/master/en/user/html/manage_validation_rule.html#about_validation_rule).

    4.  Type a **Description**.

    5.  Build an expression based on the available data elements,
        program objects, organisation units, counts and constants.

        In the right pane, double-click the data objects you want to
        include in the expression. Combine with the mathematical
        operators located below the left pane.

    6.  Click **Save**.

11. (Optional) Choose which **Organisation unit levels** this rule
    should be evaluated for. Leaving this empty will cause the
    validation rule to be evaluated at all levels.

12. (Optional) Click **Skip this rule during form validation** to avoid
    triggering this rule while doing data entry

13. Clique em **Salvar**.

### Crie ou edite um grupo de regras de validação { #create_validation_rule_group } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Validation** \>
    **Validation rule group**.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  Digite um ** Nome **.

4.  (Opcional) No campo ** Código **, atribua um código.

5.  (Opcional) Digite uma ** Descrição **.

6.  Double-click the **Validation rules** you want to assign to the
    group.

7.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Crie ou edite uma notificação de validação { #create_validation_notification } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Validation** \>
    **Validation notification**.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  Digite um ** Nome **.

4.  (Opcional) No campo ** Código **, atribua um código.

5.  Selecione ** Regras de validação **.

6.  Selecione ** Grupos de usuários destinatários **.

7.  (Opcional) Selecione ** Notificar usuários apenas na hierarquia **.

    If you select this option, the system will filter the recipient
    users. (The system derives the recipient users from the recipient
    user groups.) The filter is based on which organisation unit the
    recipient user belongs to. The users linked to organisation units
    which are ancestors of the organisation unit where the violation
    took place will receive validation notifications. The system will
    ignore other users and these users won't receive validation
    notifications.

8.  Crie o modelo de mensagem:

    1.  Crie o ** modelo de assunto **.

        Double-click the parameters in the **Template variables** field
        to add them to your subject.

    2.  Crie o ** modelo de mensagem **.

        Double-click the parameter names in the **Template variables**
        field to add them to your message.

9.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Clonar objetos de metadados { #clone_metadata } 

Cloning a data element or other objects can save time when you create
many similar objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to clone.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Clonar **.

3.  Modifique as opções que você deseja.

4.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Alterar as configurações de compartilhamento para objetos de metadados { #change-sharing-settings-for-metadata-objects } 

You can assign different sharing settings to metadata objects, for
example organisation units and tracked entity attributes. These sharing
settings control which users and users groups that can view or edit a
metadata object.

Some metadata objects also allows you to change the sharing setting of
data entry for the object. These additional settings control who can
view or enter data in form fields using the metadata.

> **Note**
>
> The default setting is that everyone (**Public access**) can find,
> view and edit metadata objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to modify.

2.  In the object list, click the context menu and select **Sharing
    settings**.

3.  (Optional) Add users or user groups: search for a user or a user
    group and select it. The user or user group is added to the list.

4.  Altere as configurações de compartilhamento dos grupos de acesso que você deseja modificar.

      - **Can edit and view**: The access group can view and edit the
        object.

      - ** Pode visualizar apenas **: O grupo de acesso pode visualizar o objeto.

      - **No access** (only applicable to **Public access**): The public
        won't have access to the object.

5.  Change data sharing settings for the access groups you want to
    modify.

      - **Can capture data**: The access group can view and capture data
        for the object.

      - **Can view data**: The access group can view data for the
        object.

      - **No access**: The access group won't have access to data for
        the object.

6.  Clique em ** Fechar **.

### Excluir objetos de metadados { #delete-metadata-objects } 

> **Note**
>
> You can only delete a data element and other data element objects if
> no data is associated to the data element itself.

> **Warning**
>
> Any data set that you delete from the system is irrevocably lost. All
> data entry forms, and section forms which may have been developed will
> also be removed. Make sure that you have made a backup of your
> database before deleting any data set in case you need to restore it
> at some point in time.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to delete.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Excluir **.

3.  Clique em ** Confirmar **.

### Exibir detalhes de objetos de metadados { #display-details-of-metadata-objects } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to view.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Show
    details**.

### Traduzir objetos de metadados { #translate-metadata-objects } 

DHIS2 provides functionality for translations of database content, for
example data elements, data element groups, indicators, indicator groups
or organisation units. You can translate these elements to any number of
locales. A locale represents a specific geographical, political, or
cultural region.

> **Tip**
>
> To activate a translation, open the **System Settings** app, click \>
> **Appearance** and select a language.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to translate.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Traduzir **.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > If you want to translate an organisation unit level, click
    > directly on the **Translate** icon next to each list item.

3.  Selecione um local.

4.  Digite um ** Nome **, ** Nome curto ** e ** Descrição **.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

## Gerenciar atributos { #manage_attribute } 

### Sobre atributos { #about_attribute } 

You can use metadata attributes to add additional information to
metadata objects. In addition to the standard attributes for each of
these objects it may be useful to store information for additional
attributes, for example the collection method for a data element.


![](resources/images/maintenance/attribute_create.png)

No aplicativo ** Maintenance **, você gerencia os seguintes objetos de atributo:



Table: Attribute objects in the Maintenance app

| Object type | Available functions |
|---|---|
| Atributo | Create, edit, clone, delete, show details and translate |

### Crie ou edite um atributo { #create-or-edit-an-attribute } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Manutenção ** e clique em ** Atributo **.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  No campo ** Nome **, digite o nome do atributo.

    Cada atributo deve ter um nome único

4.  (Opcional) No campo ** Código **, atribua um código.

5.  Selecione um ** Tipo de valor **.

    If the value supplied for the attribute does not match the value
    type you will get a warning.

6.  Selecione um ** Conjunto de opções **.

7.  Selecione as opções desejadas, por exemplo:

      - Select **Mandatory** if you want an object to always have the
        dynamic attribute.

      - Select **Unique** if you want the system to enforce that values
        are unique for a specific object type.

8.  Clique em **Salvar**.

    The dynamic attribute is now available for the objects you assigned
    it to.

### Clonar objetos de metadados { #clone_metadata } 

Cloning a data element or other objects can save time when you create
many similar objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to clone.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Clonar **.

3.  Modifique as opções que você deseja.

4.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Excluir objetos de metadados { #delete-metadata-objects } 

> **Note**
>
> You can only delete a data element and other data element objects if
> no data is associated to the data element itself.

> **Warning**
>
> Any data set that you delete from the system is irrevocably lost. All
> data entry forms, and section forms which may have been developed will
> also be removed. Make sure that you have made a backup of your
> database before deleting any data set in case you need to restore it
> at some point in time.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to delete.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Excluir **.

3.  Clique em ** Confirmar **.

### Exibir detalhes de objetos de metadados { #display-details-of-metadata-objects } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to view.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Show
    details**.

### Traduzir objetos de metadados { #translate-metadata-objects } 

DHIS2 provides functionality for translations of database content, for
example data elements, data element groups, indicators, indicator groups
or organisation units. You can translate these elements to any number of
locales. A locale represents a specific geographical, political, or
cultural region.

> **Tip**
>
> To activate a translation, open the **System Settings** app, click \>
> **Appearance** and select a language.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to translate.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Traduzir **.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > If you want to translate an organisation unit level, click
    > directly on the **Translate** icon next to each list item.

3.  Selecione um local.

4.  Digite um ** Nome **, ** Nome curto ** e ** Descrição **.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

## Gerenciar constantes { #manage_constant } 

### Sobre constantes { #about_constant } 

Constants are static **numerical** values which can be made available to users for use
in data elements and indicators. Some indicators, such as "Couple year
protection rate" depend on constants which usually do not change over
time.


![](resources/images/maintenance/constant_create.png)

No aplicativo ** Maintenance **, você gerencia os seguintes objetos constantes:



Table: Constant objects in the Maintenance app

| Object type | Available functions |
|---|---|
| Constante | Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate |

### Crie ou edite uma constante { #create_constant } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Manutenção ** e clique em ** Outro ** \> ** Constante **.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  No campo ** Nome **, digite o nome da constante.

4.  (Optional) In the **Short name** field, type an abbreviated name of
    the constant.

5.  (Opcional) No campo ** Código **, atribua um código.

6.  In the **Description** field, type a brief, informative description
    of the constant.

7.  No campo ** Valor **, defina o valor da constante.

8.  Clique em **Salvar**.

    A constante agora está disponível para uso.

### Clonar objetos de metadados { #clone_metadata } 

Cloning a data element or other objects can save time when you create
many similar objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to clone.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Clonar **.

3.  Modifique as opções que você deseja.

4.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Alterar as configurações de compartilhamento para objetos de metadados { #change-sharing-settings-for-metadata-objects } 

You can assign different sharing settings to metadata objects, for
example organisation units and tracked entity attributes. These sharing
settings control which users and users groups that can view or edit a
metadata object.

Some metadata objects also allows you to change the sharing setting of
data entry for the object. These additional settings control who can
view or enter data in form fields using the metadata.

> **Note**
>
> The default setting is that everyone (**Public access**) can find,
> view and edit metadata objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to modify.

2.  In the object list, click the context menu and select **Sharing
    settings**.

3.  (Optional) Add users or user groups: search for a user or a user
    group and select it. The user or user group is added to the list.

4.  Altere as configurações de compartilhamento dos grupos de acesso que você deseja modificar.

      - **Can edit and view**: The access group can view and edit the
        object.

      - ** Pode visualizar apenas **: O grupo de acesso pode visualizar o objeto.

      - **No access** (only applicable to **Public access**): The public
        won't have access to the object.

5.  Change data sharing settings for the access groups you want to
    modify.

      - **Can capture data**: The access group can view and capture data
        for the object.

      - **Can view data**: The access group can view data for the
        object.

      - **No access**: The access group won't have access to data for
        the object.

6.  Clique em ** Fechar **.

### Excluir objetos de metadados { #delete-metadata-objects } 

> **Note**
>
> You can only delete a data element and other data element objects if
> no data is associated to the data element itself.

> **Warning**
>
> Any data set that you delete from the system is irrevocably lost. All
> data entry forms, and section forms which may have been developed will
> also be removed. Make sure that you have made a backup of your
> database before deleting any data set in case you need to restore it
> at some point in time.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to delete.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Excluir **.

3.  Clique em ** Confirmar **.

### Exibir detalhes de objetos de metadados { #display-details-of-metadata-objects } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to view.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Show
    details**.

### Traduzir objetos de metadados { #translate-metadata-objects } 

DHIS2 provides functionality for translations of database content, for
example data elements, data element groups, indicators, indicator groups
or organisation units. You can translate these elements to any number of
locales. A locale represents a specific geographical, political, or
cultural region.

> **Tip**
>
> To activate a translation, open the **System Settings** app, click \>
> **Appearance** and select a language.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to translate.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Traduzir **.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > If you want to translate an organisation unit level, click
    > directly on the **Translate** icon next to each list item.

3.  Selecione um local.

4.  Digite um ** Nome **, ** Nome curto ** e ** Descrição **.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

## Gerenciar conjuntos de opções { #manage_option_set } 

### Sobre conjuntos de opções { #about_option_set } 

Option sets provide a pre-defined drop-down (enumerated) list for use in
DHIS2. You can define any kind of options.

An option set called "Delivery type" would have the options: "Normal",
"Breach", "Caesarian" and "Assisted".


![](resources/images/maintenance/option_set_create.png)



Table: Option set objects in the Maintenance app

| Object type | Available functions |
|---|---|
| Option set | Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate |
| Grupo de opções | Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate |
| Option group set | Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate |

### Crie ou edite um conjunto de opções { #create_option_set } 

> **Important**
>
> Option sets must have a code as well as a name. You can change the
> names but you can't change the codes. Both names and codes of all
> options must be unique, even across different option sets.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Manutenção ** e clique em ** Outro ** \> ** Conjunto de opções **.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  Na guia ** Detalhes primários **, defina o conjunto de opções:

    1.  No campo ** Nome **, digite o nome da constante.

    2.  No campo ** Código **, atribua um código.

    3.  Selecione um ** Tipo de valor **.

    4.  Clique em **Salvar**.

4.  Para cada opção necessária, execute as seguintes tarefas:

    1.  Clique na guia ** Opções **.

    2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

    3.  Type a **Name** and a **Code**. Optionally also select a
        **Color** and an **Icon** which will be used for this option in
        the data capture apps.

    4.  Classifique as opções por nome, código / valor ou manualmente.

    5.  Clique em **Salvar**.



### Crie ou edite um grupo de opções { #create_option_group } 

You can group and classify **options** within an **option set** by using **option groups**.
This way you can create a subset of options in an option set. The main purpose of this is to be able to filter huge option sets into smaller, related parts.

As opções agrupadas podem ser ocultadas ou mostradas juntas no rastreador e na captura de eventos por meio das regras do programa.

> ** Nota **
>
> Você não pode alterar o ** Conjunto de opções ** selecionado em um ** grupo de opções ** depois de criado.

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Maintenance ** e clique em ** Other ** \> ** Grupo de opções **.

2. Clique no botão adicionar.

3. Preencher o formulário:
    1. **Nome**
    2. **Nome curto**
    2. **Código**
    4. ** Conjunto de opções **

4. Depois de selecionar um ** Conjunto de opções **, você pode atribuir as ** Opções ** que deseja agrupar.

6. Clique em **Salvar**.

### Criar ou editar um conjunto de grupo de opções { #create_option_group_set } 

**Option group sets** allows you to categorise multiple **option groups** into a set.
The main purpose of the option group set is to add more dimensionality to your captured data for analysis.

> ** Nota **
>
> Você não pode alterar o ** Conjunto de opções ** selecionado em um ** Conjunto de grupos de opções ** depois de criado.

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Manutenção ** e clique em ** Outro ** \> ** Conjunto de grupos de opções **.

2. Clique no botão adicionar.

3. Preencher o formulário:
    1. **Nome**
    2. **Código**
    3. **Descrição**
    4. ** Conjunto de opções **
    5. ** Dimensão de dados **

       Se você selecionar ** Dimensão de dados **, o conjunto de grupos ficará disponível para a analítica como outra dimensão, além das dimensões padrão de “Período” e “Unidade de organização”.

4. Selecione grupos de opções e atribua-os.

   Os grupos de opções disponíveis são exibidos no painel esquerdo. Os grupos de opções que são atualmente membros do conjunto de grupos de opções são exibidos no painel direito.

5. Clique em **Salvar**.

### Clonar objetos de metadados { #clone_metadata } 

Cloning a data element or other objects can save time when you create
many similar objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to clone.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Clonar **.

3.  Modifique as opções que você deseja.

4.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Alterar as configurações de compartilhamento para objetos de metadados { #change-sharing-settings-for-metadata-objects } 

You can assign different sharing settings to metadata objects, for
example organisation units and tracked entity attributes. These sharing
settings control which users and users groups that can view or edit a
metadata object.

Some metadata objects also allows you to change the sharing setting of
data entry for the object. These additional settings control who can
view or enter data in form fields using the metadata.

> **Note**
>
> The default setting is that everyone (**Public access**) can find,
> view and edit metadata objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to modify.

2.  In the object list, click the context menu and select **Sharing
    settings**.

3.  (Optional) Add users or user groups: search for a user or a user
    group and select it. The user or user group is added to the list.

4.  Altere as configurações de compartilhamento dos grupos de acesso que você deseja modificar.

      - **Can edit and view**: The access group can view and edit the
        object.

      - ** Pode visualizar apenas **: O grupo de acesso pode visualizar o objeto.

      - **No access** (only applicable to **Public access**): The public
        won't have access to the object.

5.  Change data sharing settings for the access groups you want to
    modify.

      - **Can capture data**: The access group can view and capture data
        for the object.

      - **Can view data**: The access group can view data for the
        object.

      - **No access**: The access group won't have access to data for
        the object.

6.  Clique em ** Fechar **.

### Excluir objetos de metadados { #delete-metadata-objects } 

> **Note**
>
> You can only delete a data element and other data element objects if
> no data is associated to the data element itself.

> **Warning**
>
> Any data set that you delete from the system is irrevocably lost. All
> data entry forms, and section forms which may have been developed will
> also be removed. Make sure that you have made a backup of your
> database before deleting any data set in case you need to restore it
> at some point in time.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to delete.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Excluir **.

3.  Clique em ** Confirmar **.

### Exibir detalhes de objetos de metadados { #display-details-of-metadata-objects } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to view.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Show
    details**.

### Traduzir objetos de metadados { #translate-metadata-objects } 

DHIS2 provides functionality for translations of database content, for
example data elements, data element groups, indicators, indicator groups
or organisation units. You can translate these elements to any number of
locales. A locale represents a specific geographical, political, or
cultural region.

> **Tip**
>
> To activate a translation, open the **System Settings** app, click \>
> **Appearance** and select a language.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to translate.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Traduzir **.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > If you want to translate an organisation unit level, click
    > directly on the **Translate** icon next to each list item.

3.  Selecione um local.

4.  Digite um ** Nome **, ** Nome curto ** e ** Descrição **.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

## Gerenciar lendas { #manage_legend } 

### Sobre lendas { #about_legend } 

You can create, edit, clone, delete, show details and translate legends
to make the maps you're setting up for your users meaningful. You create
maps in the **Maps** app.

> **Note**
>
> Continuous legends must consist of legend items that end and start
> with the same value, for example: 0-50 and 50-80. Do not set legend
> items like this: 0-50 and 51-80. This will create gaps in your legend.

### Crie ou edite uma legenda { #create_legend } 

> ** Nota **
>
> Não é permitido que haja lacunas em uma legenda.
>
> Não é permitido ter itens de legenda sobrepostos.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Maintenance ** e clique em ** Other ** \> ** Legend **.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  No campo ** Nome **, digite o nome da legenda.

4.  (Opcional) No campo ** Código **, atribua um código.

5.  Crie os itens de legenda que você deseja ter em sua legenda:

    1.  Selecione ** Valor inicial ** e ** Valor final **.

    2.  Selecione ** Número de itens de legenda **.

    3.  Selecione um esquema de cores.

    4.  Clique em ** Criar itens de legenda **.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > Click the options menu to edit or delete a legend item.

6.  (Opcional) Adicione mais itens de legenda:

    1.  Clique no botão adicionar.

    2.  Insira um nome e selecione um valor inicial, um valor final e uma cor.

    3.  Clique **OK**.

7.  (Opcional) Altere as escalas de cores.

    1.  Click the colour scale to view a list of color scale options,
        and select a color scale.

    2.  To customize a color scale, click the add button. In the **Edit
        legend item** dialog, click the color scale button and hand-pick
        colors, or enter your color values.

8.  Clique em **Salvar**.


| Legend item | Start value | End value |
|---|---|---|
| Low bad | 0 | 50 |
| Médio | 50 | 80 |
| High good | 80 | 100 |
| Too high | 100 | 1000 |

### Clonar objetos de metadados { #clone_metadata } 

Cloning a data element or other objects can save time when you create
many similar objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to clone.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Clonar **.

3.  Modifique as opções que você deseja.

4.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Alterar as configurações de compartilhamento para objetos de metadados { #change-sharing-settings-for-metadata-objects } 

You can assign different sharing settings to metadata objects, for
example organisation units and tracked entity attributes. These sharing
settings control which users and users groups that can view or edit a
metadata object.

Some metadata objects also allows you to change the sharing setting of
data entry for the object. These additional settings control who can
view or enter data in form fields using the metadata.

> **Note**
>
> The default setting is that everyone (**Public access**) can find,
> view and edit metadata objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to modify.

2.  In the object list, click the context menu and select **Sharing
    settings**.

3.  (Optional) Add users or user groups: search for a user or a user
    group and select it. The user or user group is added to the list.

4.  Altere as configurações de compartilhamento dos grupos de acesso que você deseja modificar.

      - **Can edit and view**: The access group can view and edit the
        object.

      - ** Pode visualizar apenas **: O grupo de acesso pode visualizar o objeto.

      - **No access** (only applicable to **Public access**): The public
        won't have access to the object.

5.  Change data sharing settings for the access groups you want to
    modify.

      - **Can capture data**: The access group can view and capture data
        for the object.

      - **Can view data**: The access group can view data for the
        object.

      - **No access**: The access group won't have access to data for
        the object.

6.  Clique em ** Fechar **.

### Excluir objetos de metadados { #delete-metadata-objects } 

> **Note**
>
> You can only delete a data element and other data element objects if
> no data is associated to the data element itself.

> **Warning**
>
> Any data set that you delete from the system is irrevocably lost. All
> data entry forms, and section forms which may have been developed will
> also be removed. Make sure that you have made a backup of your
> database before deleting any data set in case you need to restore it
> at some point in time.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to delete.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Excluir **.

3.  Clique em ** Confirmar **.

### Exibir detalhes de objetos de metadados { #display-details-of-metadata-objects } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to view.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Show
    details**.

### Traduzir objetos de metadados { #translate-metadata-objects } 

DHIS2 provides functionality for translations of database content, for
example data elements, data element groups, indicators, indicator groups
or organisation units. You can translate these elements to any number of
locales. A locale represents a specific geographical, political, or
cultural region.

> **Tip**
>
> To activate a translation, open the **System Settings** app, click \>
> **Appearance** and select a language.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to translate.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Traduzir **.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > If you want to translate an organisation unit level, click
    > directly on the **Translate** icon next to each list item.

3.  Selecione um local.

4.  Digite um ** Nome **, ** Nome curto ** e ** Descrição **.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Atribuir uma legenda ao indicador ou elemento de dados { #assign-a-legend-to-indicator-or-data-element } 

You can assign a legend to an indicator or a data element in the
**Maintenance** app, either when you create the object or edit it. When
you then select the indicator or data element in the **Maps** app, the
system automatically selects the assigned legend.

### Veja também { #see_also_legend } 

  - [Using the GIS
    app](https://docs.dhis2.org/master/en/user/html/using_gis.html)

## Gerenciar preditores { #manage_predictor } 

### Sobre preditores { #about-predictors } 

A predictor defines how to generate an aggregate data value from an expression
containing aggregate and/or event data. The predicted value may be based on:

- Data from the same period as the predicted value, and/or

- Data from periods previous to the predicted value

#### Data from the same period { #data_from_the_same_period } 

A predictor can use data from the same period as the predicted value.
For example, you can count the number of organisation units having
a non-zero value of a data element by using a predictor expression such as:

<pre><code>if( #{ji7o0ILHuU2} != 0, 1, 0 )</code></pre>

When you run this predictor at the organisation unit level where the data is
collected, it will store 1 as the predicted value if the data element has a
nonzero value for that organisation unit, otherwise 0.
(If the data element that you predict into does not store zeros, then
zeros will not be stored in the database, to save space.)
You can then sum this predicted value in analytics at a higher
organisation unit level, to count the number of organisation units
with a nonzero value that are under each organisation unit in the report.

#### Data from previous periods { #data_from_previous_periods } 

A predictor will use data from previous periods when you specify an aggregation
function such as sum() or avg(). For example, the following generator expression
identifies a value that is the average plus twice the standard deviation of
previous period data:

<pre><code>avg( #{ji7o0ILHuU2} ) + 2 * stddev( #{ji7o0ILHuU2} )</code></pre>

#### Data from the same and previous periods { #data_from_the_same_and_previous_periods } 

A predictor expression can access data both from same period as the
prediction and previous periods by accessing data both within an
agregate function (for previous periods), and outside any aggregate function
(for the same period). For example, an expression like the following can be
used to take a balance of something from the previous period (#{KOh02hHko7C}),
add to that the net change in this period (#{ji7o0ILHuU2}),
resulting in the balance for this period:

<pre><code>sum( #{KOh02hHko7C} ) + #{ji7o0ILHuU2}</code></pre>

The first data value is inside an aggregate expression (sum) to indicate that
it is sampling previous period data (even if there is only one previous period),
while the second data value is not in an aggreate function to indicate that it
is referencing data from the same period.

If you want to, a predictor's output data element can be referenced in the same
predictor's expression. For instance, the expression in this example could
be used to predict the balance in a period, and then combine that value with
the change in the next period to compute the balance for the next period.
When a predictor is run across multiple periods, the periods are processed in
chronological order, and the result from an earlier period may be used
as input for a later period.

#### Predictor organisation unit levels { #predictor_organisation_unit_levels } 

You need to select one or more organisation unit levels for a predictor's output.
All values generated by the predictor are stored for organisation units at the
level(s) you select. Each item in the predictor expression is the sum of the value
stored for that organisation unit (if any) plus any values stored in organisation
units below that one (if any).

> **Note**
>
> In configuring a predictor, you must choose one or more organisation unit levels
> at which predicted data will be output. If no level is selected, no predicted
> values will be generated.

> **Warning**
>
> If you want to use the predicted values in analytics reporting, or to make
> other predictions, *do not select more than one organisation unit level*.
> When you select more than one level, predictions at the higher level(s) will
> also include any data used in lower level(s) predictions. If the predictions
> from multiple levels are subsequently used in analytics, or in the expressions
> of other predictors, this can result in double counting because the predicted
> values for a higher level include the predicted values from a lower level.

You may select multiple organisation unit levels if you use the predicted
values only in validation rules. For example in disease surveillance, you
could have a validation rule alert if an actual value is higher than the
range of expected values for that period based on previous period data.
To do this, you could create a predictor to compute the average plus twice the
standard deviation of previous period data. You could use a validation
rule to compare this higest expected value with the actual value.
You could run the predictor and validation rule at multiple levels
to detect different outbreak scenarios. In one scenario, there might be
a significant increase in one facility that exceeds its expected range, but
the district containing that facility might not exceed its expected range
because the district values are combined with many other facilities.
Yet in another scenario, there may be a moderate increase in several
facilities that does not exceed the expected range for each facility (because
the standard deviation for each facility may be high), but it does exceed
the expected range for the district (because the
standard deviation for the district as a whole may be lower).

If you want to generate predictions at multiple levels, you could also
use different predictors at different levels. For example, you might want to
be alerted if the value at one level exceeds the average plus twice the standard
deviation, but alerted at another level if it exceeds the average plus 1.8 times
the standard deviation. If you want, you could configure the different predictors
to have the same output data element. If you use the same output data element,
this will still work with validaiton rules at different organisaiton unit levels,
but you also must be careful not to use the results in analytics or in other
predictor calculations to avoid double counting.

No aplicativo ** Maintenance **, você gerencia os seguintes objetos preditores:



Table: Predictor objects in the Maintenance app

| Object type | Available functions |
|---|---|
| Predictor | Create, edit, clone, delete, show details and translate |

### Sampling previous periods { #sampling-previous-periods } 

Predictors can generate data values for periods that are in the past,
present, or future. These values are based on data from the predicted period,
and/or sampled data from periods previous to the predicted period.

If you need data only from the same period in which the prediction is made,
then you don't need to read this section. This section describes how to
sample data from periods previous to the predicted period.

#### Contagem de amostra sequencial { #sequential_sample_count } 

A predictor's *Sequential sample count* gives the number of immediate
previous periods to sample. For example, if a predictor's period type is
*Weekly* and the *Sequential sample count* is 4, this means to sample
four previous weeks immediately preceding the predicted value week. So the
predicted value for week 9 would use samples from weeks 5, 6, 7, and 8:

![](resources/images/maintenance/predictor_sequential.png){.center width=50% }

If a predictor's period type is *Monthly* and the *Sequential sample
count* is 4, this means to sample four previous months immediately
preceding the predicted value month. So the predicted value for May
would use samples from weeks January, February, March, and April:

![](resources/images/maintenance/predictor_sequential_month.png){.center width=51% }

The *Sequential sample count* can be greater than the number of periods
in a year. For example, if you want to sample the 24 months immediately
preceding the predicted value month, set the *Sequential sample count*
to 24:

![](resources/images/maintenance/predictor_24_months.png){.center width=57% }

#### Contagem de saltos sequenciais { #sequential_skip_count } 

A predictor's *Sequential skip count* tells how many periods should be
skipped immediately previous to the predicted value period, within the
*Sequential sample count*. This could be used, for instance, in outbreak
detection to skip one or more immediately preceding samples that might
in fact contain values from the beginning of an outbreak that you are
trying to detect.

For example, if the *Sequential sample count* is 4, but the *Sequential
skip count* is 2, then the two samples immediately preceding the
predicted period will be skipped, resulting in only two periods being
sampled:


![](resources/images/maintenance/predictor_skip.png){.center width=50% }

#### Contagem de amostra anual { #annual_sample_count } 

A predictor's *Annual sample count* gives the number of previous years for
which samples should be collected at the same time of year. This could
be used, for instance, for disease surveillance in cases where the
expected incidence of the disease varies during the year and can best be
compared with the same relative period in previous years. For example,
if the *Annual sample count* is 2 (and the *Sequential sample count* is
zero), then samples would be collected from periods in the immediately
preceding two years, at the same time of year.


![](resources/images/maintenance/predictor_annual.png){.center width=53% }

#### Contagens de amostras sequenciais e anuais juntas { #sequential_annual_sample_count } 

You can use the sequential and annual sample counts together to collect
samples from a number of sequential periods over a number of past years.
When you do this, samples will be collected in previous years during the
period at the same time of year as the predicted value period, and also
in previous years both before and after the same time of year, as
determined by the *Sequential sample count* number.

For example, if the *Sequential sample count* is 4 and the *Annual
sample count* is 2, samples will be collected from the 4 periods
immediately preceding the predicted value period. In addition samples
will be collected in the previous 2 years for the corresponding period, as
well as 4 periods on either side:


![](resources/images/maintenance/predictor_sequential_annual.png){.center width=66% }

#### Contagens sequenciais, anuais e de amostra ignoradas juntas { #sequential_annual_skip_sample_count } 

You can use the *Sequential skip count* together with the sequential and
annual sample counts. When you do this, the *Sequential skip count*
tells how many periods to skip in the same year as the predicted value
period. For example, if the *Sequential sample count* is 4 and the
*Sequential skip count* is 2, then the two periods immediately preceding
the predicted value period period will be skipped, but the two periods
before that will be sampled:


![](resources/images/maintenance/predictor_skip_2_weeks.png){.center width=66% }

If the *Sequential skip count* is equal to or greater than the
*Sequential sample count*, then no samples will be collected for the
year containing the predicted value period; only periods from past years
will be sampled:

![](resources/images/maintenance/predictor_skip_current_year.png){.center width=66% }

#### Teste de salto de amostra { #sample_skip_test } 

You can use the *Sample skip test* to skip samples from certain periods
that would otherwise be included, based on the results of testing an
expression within those periods. This could be used, for instance, in
disease outbreak detection, where the sample skip test could identify
previous disease outbreaks, to exclude those samples from the prediction
of a non-outbreak baseline expected value.

The *Sample skip test* is an expression that should return a value of
true or false, to indicate whether or not the period should be skipped.
It can be an expression that tests any data values in the previous period.
For example, it could test for a data value that was explicitly entered
to indicate that a previous period should be skipped. Or it could
compare a previously predicted value for a period with the actual value
recorded for that period, to determine if that period should be skipped.

Any periods for which the *Sample skip test* is *true* will not be
sampled. For example:


![](resources/images/maintenance/predictor_sample_skip_test.png){.center width=66% }

### Crie ou edite um preditor { #create_predictor } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Maintenance ** e clique em ** Other ** \> ** Predictor **.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  No campo ** Nome **, digite o nome do preditor.

4.  (Opcional) No campo ** Código **, atribua um código.

5.  (Opcional) Digite uma ** Descrição **.

6.  Select an **Output data element**. Values generated by this
    predictor are stored as aggregate data associated with this data
    element and the predicted period.

    The value is rounded according to the value type of the data
    element: If the value type is an integer type, the predicted value
    is rounded to the nearest integer. For all other value types, the
    number is rounded to four significant digits. (However if there are
    more than four digits to the left of the decimal place, they are not
    replaced with zeros.)

7.  (Optional) Select an **Output category option combo**. This dropdown will only show
    if the selected data element has a non-default category combination.
    If so, you can select which category option combo (disaggregation) you would like to output to.

8.  Selecione um ** Tipo de período **.

9.  Assign one or more **organisation unit levels**. The output value will be
    assigned to an organisation unit at this level (or these levels).
    For **aggregate** data, the input values depends on the selection below; **organisation units providing data**.
    For **tracker** based data,  the input values will come from the organisation unit to which the
    output is assigned, or from any level lower under the output
    organisation unit.

10. **Organisation units providing data** controls where the input values comes from for **aggregate** data. If "at selected levels only", only organisation units at the selected levels are included. If "At selected levels and all levels below" is selected, organisation units at the selected level(s) and all organisation units below are also included.
11. Crie um ** Gerador **. O gerador é a expressão usada para calcular o valor previsto.

    1.  Digite uma ** Descrição ** da expressão geradora.

    2.  Selecione uma ** Estratégia de valor ausente **. Esta seleção define como o sistema avalia uma regra de validação se houver dados ausentes.

        | Opção | Descrição
        |--- |--- |
        | Pule se algum valor estiver faltando | A regra de validação será ignorada se algum dos valores que compõem a expressão estiver faltando. Esta é a opção padrão. <br> <br> Sempre selecione esta opção, você usa o operador ** Par exclusivo ** ou ** Par obrigatório **. |
        | Ignorar se todos os valores estiverem ausentes | A regra de validação será ignorada apenas se todos os valores que a compõem estiverem ausentes. |
        | Nunca pule | A regra de validação nunca será ignorada no caso de dados ausentes e todos os valores ausentes serão tratados efetivamente como zero. |

    3.  Insira a expressão do gerador. Você pode construir a expressão selecionando elementos de dados para dados agregados ou elementos de dados de programa, atributos ou indicadores. As contagens de unidades organizacionais ainda não são suportadas.

        Para usar dados de amostra de períodos anteriores, você deve incluir todos os itens selecionados em uma das seguintes funções de agregação (observe que esses nomes de função diferenciam maiúsculas de minúsculas):

        | Aggregate function | Means |
        |---|---|
        | avg(x) | Average (mean) value of x |
        | count(x) | Count of the values of x |
        | max(x) | Maximum value of x |
        | median(x) | Median value of x |
        | min(x) | Minimum value of x |
        | percentileCont(p, x) | Continuous percentile of x, where p is the percentile as a floating point number between 0 and 1. For example, p = 0 will return the lowest value, p = 0.5 will return the median, p = 0.75 will return the 75th percentile, p = 1 will return the highest value, etc. Continuous means that the value will be interpolated if necessary. For example, percentileCont( 0.5, #{FTRrcoaog83} ) will return 2.5 if the sampled values of data element FTRrcoaog83 are 1, 2, 3, and 4. |
        | stddev(x) | Standard deviation of x. This function is eqivalent to stddevSamp. It's suggested that you use the function stddevSamp instead for greater clarity. |
        | stddevPop(x) | Population standard deviation of x: sqrt( sum( (x - avg(x))^2 ) / n ) |
        | stddevSamp(x) | Sample standard deviation of x: sqrt( sum( (x - avg(x))^2 ) / ( n - 1 ) ). Note that this value is not computed when there is only one sample. |
        | sum(x) | Sum of the values of x |

        > **Note**
        >
        > Any items inside an aggregate function will be evaluated for all
        > sampled past periods, and then combined according to the formula
        > inside the aggregate function. Any items outside an aggregate
        > function will be evaluated for the period in which the
        > prediction is being made.

        You can build more complex expressions by clicking on (or
        typing) any of the elements below the expression field:
        ( ) \* / + - Days.
        Constant numbers may be added by typing them. The Days
        option inserts \[days\] into the expression which resolves to
        the number of days in the period from which the data came.

        You can also use the following non-aggregating functions in your
        expression, either inside aggregate functions, or containing
        aggregate functions, or independent of aggregate functions:


        | Function | Means |
        |---|---|
        | if(test, valueIfTrue, valueIfFalse) | Evaluates **test** which is an expression that evaluates to a boolean value -- see **Boolean expression notes** below. If the test is **true**, returns the **valueIfTrue** expression. If it is **false**, returns the **valueIfFalse** expression. |
        | is(expr1 in expression [, expression ...]) | Returns true if expr1 is equal to any of the following expressions, otherwise false. |
        | isNull(item) | Returns the boolean value **true** if the **item** is null (missing), otherwise returns **false**. The **item** can be any selected item from the right (data element, program data element, etc.). |
        | isNotNull(item) | Returns **true** if the **item** value is not missing (not null), otherwise **false**. |
        | firstNonNull(item [, item ...]) | Returns the value of the first **item** that is not missing (not null). Can be provided any number of arguments. Any argument may also be a numeric or string literal, which will be returned if all the previous items have missing values. |
        | greatest(expression [, expression ...]) | Returns the greatest (highest) value of the expressions given. Can be provided any number of arguments. |
        | least(expression [, expression ...]) | Returns the least (lowest) value of the expressions given. Can be provided any number of arguments. |
        | log(expression [, base ]) | Returns the natural logarithm (base e) of the numeric expression. If an integer is given as a second argument, returns the logarithm using that base. |
        | log10(expression) | Returns the common logarithm (base 10) of the numeric expression. |
        | normDistCum(x [,mean [,stddev]]) | Returns the cumulative distribution function (CDF) value for x given the normalized distribution described by the mean and stddev. Equivalent to Excel NORM.DIST(x,mean,stddev,TRUE) or LibreOffice NORMDIST(x,mean,stddev,1). If stddev is not given, it is computed from past sampled values of x. If neither mean nor stddev are given, they are computed from past sampled valeus of x. See examples. |
        | normDistDen(x [,mean [,stddev]]) | Returns the probability density function (PDF) value for x given the normalized distribution described by the mean and stddev. Equivalent to Excel NORM.DIST(x,mean,stddev,FALSE) or LibreOffice NORMDIST(x,mean,stddev,0). If stddev is not given, it is computed from past sampled values of x. If neither mean nor stddev are given, they are computed from past sampled valeus of x. See examples. |
        | null | Returns no result. For example, _if( #{FH8ab5Rog83}<0, null, 1 )_ returns nothing if the data element value is less than 0, otherwise 1. |
        | orgUnit.ancestor(orgUnitUid [, orgUnitUid ...]) | Returns true if the organisation unit is a descendant of any of the (1 or more) organisation units, otherwise false. |
        | orgUnit.dataSet(dataSetUid [, dataSetUid ...]) | Returns true if the organisation unit is assigned to any of the (1 or more) data sets, otherwise false. |
        | orgUnit.group(ouGroupUid [, ouGroupUid ...]) | Returns true if the organisation unit is a member of any of the (1 or more) organisation unit groups, otherwise false. |
        | orgUnit.program(programUid [, programUid ...]) | Returns true if the organisation unit is assigned to any of the (1 or more) programs, otherwise false. |
        | removeZeros(expression) | Returns nothing if the expression value is 0, otherwise returns the expression value. |
        | .maxDate(yyyy-mm-dd) | For a data element (not program data), value from periods ending on or before a maximum date. |
        | .minDate(yyyy-mm-dd) | For a data element (not program data), value from periods starting on or after a minimum date. |

        **Boolean expression notes:** A boolean expression must evaluate
        to **true** or **false**. The following operators may be used to
        compare two values resulting in a boolean expression: \<, \>,
        \!=, ==, \>=, and \<=. The following operators may be used to
        combine two boolean expressions: && or the keyword _and_ (logical and), and || or the keyword _or_
        (logical or). The unary operator \! or the keyword _not_ may be used to negate a
        boolean expression.

        **Generator expression examples:**


        | Generator expression | Means |
        |---|---|
        | sum(#{FTRrcoaog83.tMwM3ZBd7BN}) | Sum of the sampled values of data element FTRrcoaog83 and category option combination (disaggregation) tMwM3ZBd7BN |
        | avg(I{GSae40Fyppf}) + 2 \* stddevSamp(I{GSae40Fyppf}) | Average of the sampled values of of program indicator GSae40Fyppf plus twice its sample standard deviation |
        | sum(D{IpHINAT79UW.eMyVanycQSC}) / sum([days]) | Sum of all sampled values of data element eMyVanycQSC from porgram IpHINAT79UW divided by the number of days in all sample periods (resulting in the overall average daily value) |
        | sum(#{FTRrcoaog83}) + #{T7OyqQpUpNd} | Sum of all sampled values of data element FTRrcoaog83 plus the value of data element T7OyqQpUpNd in the period being predicted for (includes all disaggregations) |
        | 1.2 \* A{IpHINAT79UW.RKLKz1H20EE} | 1.2 times the value of attribute RKLKz1H20EE of program IpHINAT79UW, in the period being predicted for |
        | if(isNull(#{T7OyqQpUpNd}), 0, 1) | If the data element T7OyqQpUpNd is null in the period being predicted, then 0, otherwise 1 |
        | if(is(#{jeiTh8ahyae} in 'NEGATIVE','UNKNOWN'), 0, 1) | If the data element jeiTh8ahyae has value 'NEGATIVE' or 'UNKNOWN' then 0, otherwise 1 |
        | percentileCont(0.5, #{T7OyqQpUpNd}) | Continuous 50th percentile of the sampled values for data element T7OyqQpUpNd. Note that this is the same as median(#{T7OyqQpUpNd}) |
        | if(count(#{T7OyqQpUpNd}) == 1, 0, stddevSamp(#{T7OyqQpUpNd})) | If there is one sample value present for data element T7OyqQpUpNd, then 0, otherwise the sample standard deviation of these sample values. (Note that if no samples are present then the stddevSamp returns no value, so no value is predicted.) |
        | normDistCum(#{T7OyqQpUpNd}) | The cumulative distribution function for the current period value of data element T7OyqQpUpNd based on the normalized distribution defined by the mean and standard deviation of past sampled periods of data element T7OyqQpUpNd |
        | normDistCum( #{T7OyqQpUpNd}, median(#{T7OyqQpUpNd}) ) | The cumulative distribution function for the current period value of data element T7OyqQpUpNd based on the distribution defined by the median (instead of the mean) and standard deviation of past sampled periods of data element T7OyqQpUpNd |
        | normDistCum( #{T7OyqQpUpNd}, median(#{T7OyqQpUpNd}) ) | The cumulative distribution function for the current period value of data element T7OyqQpUpNd based on the distribution defined by the median (instead of the mean) and standard deviation of past sampled periods of data element T7OyqQpUpNd |
        | normDistCum( #{T7OyqQpUpNd}, avg(#{T7OyqQpUpNd}), stddev(#{T7OyqQpUpNd}) ) | Same as normDistCum( #{T7OyqQpUpNd} ) |
        | normDistDen( #{T7OyqQpUpNd}, avg(#{IKahz1Quie3}), stddev(#{IKahz1Quie3}) ) | The probability density function for the current period value of data element T7OyqQpUpNd based on the distribution defined by the mean and standard deviation of past sampled periods of the different data element IKahz1Quie3 |
        | normDistDen( median(#{T7OyqQpUpNd}), avg(#{IKahz1Quie3}), stddev(#{IKahz1Quie3}) ) | The probability density function for the median of past sampled values of data element T7OyqQpUpNd based on the distribution defined by the mean and standard deviation of past sampled periods of the different data element IKahz1Quie3 |
        | #{T7OyqQpUpNd}.minDate(2022-10-1) | Value on or after 1-Oct-2022 |
        | #{T7OyqQpUpNd}.maxDate(2022-12-31) | Value on or before 31-Dec-2022 |
        | #{T7OyqQpUpNd}.minDate(2022-10-1).maxDate(2022-12-31) | Value bewteen 1-Oct-2022 and 31-Dec-2022 |

12. (Optional) Create a **Sample skip test**. The sample skip test tells
    which previous periods if any to exclude from the sample.

    1.  Digite uma ** Descrição ** do teste de salto.

    2.  Enter the sample skip test expression. You can build the
        expression by selecting data elements for aggregate data, or
        program data elements, attributes or indicators. Organisation
        unit counts are not yet supported. As with the generator
        function, you may click on (or type) any of the elements below
        the expression field: ( ) \* / + - Days.

        The non-aggregating functions described above for generator expressions may also be used
        in skip tests.

        The expression must evaluate to a boolean value of **true** or
        **false**. See **Boolean expression notes** above.

        Pule os exemplos de expressão de teste:


        | Skip test expression | Means |
        |---|---|
        | #{FTRrcoaog83} \> #{M62VHgYT2n0} | The value of data element FTRrcoaog83 (sum of all disaggregations) is greater than the value of data element M62VHgYT2n0 (sum of all disaggregations) |
        | #{uF1DLnZNlWe} \> 0 | The value of data element uF1DLnZNlWe (sum of all disaggregations) is greater than the zero |
        | #{FTRrcoaog83} \> #{M62VHgYT2n0} &#124;&#124; #{uF1DLnZNlWe} \> 0 | The value of data element FTRrcoaog83 (sum of all disaggregations) is greater than the value of data element M62VHgYT2n0 (sum of all disaggregations) or the value of data element uF1DLnZNlWe (sum of all disaggregations) is greater than the zero |

13. Insira um valor de ** Contagem de amostra sequencial **.

    This is for how many sequential periods the calculation should go
    back in time to sample data for the calculations.

14. Insira um valor de ** Contagem de amostra anual **.

    This is for how many years the calculation should go back in time to
    sample data for the calculations.

15. (Opcional) Insira um valor de ** Contagem sequencial de pulos **.

    This is how many sequential periods, immediately preceding the
    predicted value period, should be skipped before sampling the data.

16. Clique em **Salvar**.

### Predictions by Data Element Group { #predictions_by_data_element_group }

You can use a single predictor to operate on all the data elements in a group instead of a different predictor for each data element. This can be used, for example, in logistics management when a data element is used for each commodity and a category option combination is used for each count related to that commodity.

The syntax is:

    forEach ?de in :DEG:degUid --> main expression

where:

| part | significa |
|---|---|
| forEach | required keyword at the start of the expression |
| ?_de_ | any variable name starting with '?', then one letter, then optionally any number of additional letters or digits (case sensitive). Examples: ?de, ?X, ?dataElement, etc. |
| in | required keyword |
| :DEG:_degUid_ | the notation :DEG: followed by the UID of the data element group containing the data elements to be processed |
| -> | required before the main expression |
| _main expression_ | the expression to operate on each data element in the group. Within this expression use the variable name (such as ?de) as a placeholder for each data element |

The predictor will execute once for each data element in the data element group.
For each data element, instances of the variable in the main expression are replaced by that data element. The same data element is also used as the predictor output data element.
The predicted value will be written to that data element using the configured output category option combination.

The predictor must be configured with an output data element, but it is effectively ignored when the predictor is run.
It is suggested that you configure the predictor with one of the data elements in the data element group that the predictor will use.
That way you can select a valid output category option combination for that data element.

At the time the predictor is created, the data element group must contain at least one data element of the type that you will use. (The data type of the data element is used during syntax checking of the predictor.)

#### Example 1 { #example-1 } 

You have data elements that represent various commodities, all belonging to a data element group with UID <code>aIMu0nieph7</code>.

You have category option combinations with the following UIDs:

| category option combo | significa |
|---|---|
| <code>Gvoecom5muL</code> | Stock balance at start of period |
| <code>CWa6eew5uco</code> | Restock during period |
| <code>nthohhie8Ba</code> | Used during period |
| <code>Faey8Iphooy</code> | Lost, damaged, expired, or stolen during period |

The following predictor generator expression will compute the stock balance at the beginning of the next period as ( starting balance + restock - used - lost ):

<pre><code>forEach ?de in :DEG:aIMu0nieph7 -->
sum( #{?de.Gvoecom5muL} + #{?de.CWa6eew5uco} - #{?de.nthohhie8Ba} - #{?de.Faey8Iphooy} )</code></pre>

The predictor configuration includes:

| property | value |
|---|---|
| Output data element | one of the data elements in the group |
| Output category option combo | Stock balance at start of period (<code>Gvoecom5muL</code>) |
| Organisation units providing data | At selected level(s) only |
| Contagem de amostra sequencial | 1 |
| Contagem de amostra anual | 0 |

The predictor will execute once for each data element in the data element group. Because the aggregation function <code>sum()</code> is used in the predictor generator expression, all the values in the expression will be fetched from the previous period (since the sequential sample count is 1). The predictor will write out the starting balance for each data element for the periods within the predictor run start and end date, for organisation units at the selected level(s).

Predictions are always made forward through time. The starting balance predicted for one period can be used as an input to compute the starting balance of the following period.

#### Example 2 { #example-2 } 

If you want to make predictions for the same period as the input data, just omit the aggregation function such as <code>sum()</code>. Adding to the previous example, say you have another category option combination that computes the net inventory change during the period:

| category option combo | significa |
|---|---|
| <code>Hpiek8IefoS</code> | Stock change during the period |

You can use the following expression to compute the inventory change as ( restock - used - lost ):

<pre><code>forEach ?de in :DEG:aIMu0nieph7 -->
#{?de.CWa6eew5uco} - #{?de.nthohhie8Ba} - #{?de.Faey8Iphooy}</code></pre>

The output category option combo is:

| property | value |
|---|---|
| Output category option combo | Stock change during the period (<code>Hpiek8IefoS</code>) |

Since there is no aggregation function such as <code>sum()</code> around the expression elements, the input data is taken from the same period as the predictor output.

### Criar ou editar um grupo de previsão { #create_predictor_group } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Other** \> **Predictor
    group**.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  Digite um ** Nome **. Este campo precisa ser único.

4.  (Optional) In the **Code** field, assign a code. This field needs to
    be unique.

5.  (Opcional) Digite uma ** Descrição **.

6.  Clique duas vezes nos ** Preditores ** que deseja atribuir ao grupo.

7.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Clonar objetos de metadados { #clone_metadata } 

Cloning a data element or other objects can save time when you create
many similar objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to clone.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Clonar **.

3.  Modifique as opções que você deseja.

4.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Excluir objetos de metadados { #delete-metadata-objects } 

> **Note**
>
> You can only delete a data element and other data element objects if
> no data is associated to the data element itself.

> **Warning**
>
> Any data set that you delete from the system is irrevocably lost. All
> data entry forms, and section forms which may have been developed will
> also be removed. Make sure that you have made a backup of your
> database before deleting any data set in case you need to restore it
> at some point in time.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to delete.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Excluir **.

3.  Clique em ** Confirmar **.

### Exibir detalhes de objetos de metadados { #display-details-of-metadata-objects } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to view.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Show
    details**.

### Traduzir objetos de metadados { #translate-metadata-objects } 

DHIS2 provides functionality for translations of database content, for
example data elements, data element groups, indicators, indicator groups
or organisation units. You can translate these elements to any number of
locales. A locale represents a specific geographical, political, or
cultural region.

> **Tip**
>
> To activate a translation, open the **System Settings** app, click \>
> **Appearance** and select a language.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to translate.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Traduzir **.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > If you want to translate an organisation unit level, click
    > directly on the **Translate** icon next to each list item.

3.  Selecione um local.

4.  Digite um ** Nome **, ** Nome curto ** e ** Descrição **.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

## Gerenciar relatórios push { #manage_push_report } 

### Sobre relatórios push { #about_push_report } 

Push reports allows you to increase awareness and usage of data analysis
by sending reports with charts, tables and maps directly to users e-mail
addresses.

  - Um relatório push obtém seu conteúdo de painéis existentes.

  - A push report lists the dashboard items in the same order as on the
    dashboard.

  - A push report can only contain dashboard items with charts, maps or
    tables.

  - You create the push report and its schedule in the **Maintenance**
    app.

  - The **Title** and **Message** parameters you set up in the
    **Maintenance** app, are included in each report. The **Name** you
    give the report is not included in the report. Instead, the name is
    used to identify the push analysis object in the system. This way a
    report can be named one thing, and the title of the report can be
    another.

  - When you run a push report job, the system compiles a list of
    recipients from the user groups you've selected. The system then
    generates a report for each member of the selected user groups. Each
    of the dashboard items are generated specifically for each user.
    This means that the data included in the report reflects the data
    the user has access to. All users could therefore get the same
    report (if all the data is "static") or custom reports (if all the
    data is "dynamic"), or a combination of the two.

  - Push reports are sent by e-mail to the recipients, not through the
    internal DHIS2 messaging system. If a user doesn't have a valid
    e-mail, or if the job fails, no e-mails are sent. In this case, the
    problem is logged on the server.

> **Note**
>
> The data generated in the push reports is public so verify that you
> don't include any sensitive data.


![](resources/images/maintenance/push_report_ex.png)

In the **Maintenance** app, you manage the following push reports
objects:



Table: Push reports objects in the Maintenance app

| Object type | Available functions |
|---|---|
| Push analysis | Create, edit, clone, delete, show details, translate, preview and run |

### Crie ou edite um relatório push { #create_push_report } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Other** \> **Push
    analysis**.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  No campo ** Nome **, digite o nome do relatório programado.

    This name is not included in the report e-mail. Instead, the name is
    used to identify the push analysis object in the system.

4.  (Opcional) No campo ** Código **, atribua um código.

5.  Adicione um relatório ** Título **.

    Este título está incluído no e-mail do relatório.

6.  (Opcional) Adicione uma ** Mensagem **.

    Esta mensagem está incluída no e-mail do relatório.

7.  Selecione um ** Painel ** para basear o relatório.

8.  Selecione e atribua os grupos de usuários para os quais deseja enviar o relatório.

9.  Select a **Scheduling frequency**: **Daily**, **Weekly** or
    **Monthly**.

    > **Note**
    >
    > If you schedule a push report to "Monthly" and "31", the scheduled
    > report job will not run if the month has less than 31 days.

10. (Opcional) Selecione ** Ativar ** para ativar o trabalho de relatório push.

    O trabalho não será executado até que você o ative.

11. Clique em **Salvar**.

### Visualize relatórios push { #preview_push_report } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Other** \> **Push
    analysis**.

2.  Na lista de relatórios de envio, localize o relatório de envio que deseja visualizar.

3.  Clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Visualizar **.

    Uma visualização do relatório push é aberta em uma nova janela.

### Executar trabalhos de relatório push { #run_push_report } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Other** \> **Push
    analysis**.

2.  Na lista de relatórios push, localize o relatório push que deseja executar.

3.  Clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Executar agora **.

    O trabalho de relatório push é executado imediatamente.

### Clonar objetos de metadados { #clone_metadata } 

Cloning a data element or other objects can save time when you create
many similar objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to clone.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Clonar **.

3.  Modifique as opções que você deseja.

4.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Excluir objetos de metadados { #delete-metadata-objects } 

> **Note**
>
> You can only delete a data element and other data element objects if
> no data is associated to the data element itself.

> **Warning**
>
> Any data set that you delete from the system is irrevocably lost. All
> data entry forms, and section forms which may have been developed will
> also be removed. Make sure that you have made a backup of your
> database before deleting any data set in case you need to restore it
> at some point in time.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to delete.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Excluir **.

3.  Clique em ** Confirmar **.

### Exibir detalhes de objetos de metadados { #display-details-of-metadata-objects } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to view.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Show
    details**.

### Traduzir objetos de metadados { #translate-metadata-objects } 

DHIS2 provides functionality for translations of database content, for
example data elements, data element groups, indicators, indicator groups
or organisation units. You can translate these elements to any number of
locales. A locale represents a specific geographical, political, or
cultural region.

> **Tip**
>
> To activate a translation, open the **System Settings** app, click \>
> **Appearance** and select a language.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to translate.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Traduzir **.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > If you want to translate an organisation unit level, click
    > directly on the **Translate** icon next to each list item.

3.  Selecione um local.

4.  Digite um ** Nome **, ** Nome curto ** e ** Descrição **.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

## Gerenciar camadas de mapa externas { #manage_external_maplayer } 

### Sobre camadas externas do mapa { #about_gis_map_layers } 

You can customize GIS by including map layers from various sources and
combine them with your own data in DHIS2. DHIS2 supports these common map
service formats: Web Map Service (WMS), Tile Map Service (TMS), XYZ tiles and Vector tiles (Vector Style).

### Crie ou edite uma camada externa do mapa { #create_external_map_layer } 

> **Note**
>
> DHIS2 only supports the Web Mercator projection
> ([EPSG:3857](https://epsg.io/3857)) so make sure that the external
> service supports this projection.



Table: External map layer objects in the Maintenance app

| Object type | Available functions |
|---|---|
| External map layer | Create, edit, clone, delete, show details and translate |

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Other** \> **External map
    layer**.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  In the **Name** field, type a name that describes the content of the
    external map layer.

    Este é o nome que você verá no aplicativo ** Maps **.

4.  (Opcional) No campo ** Código **, atribua um código.

5.  Selecione um formato de ** serviço de mapas **.

    DHIS2 supports four common map service formats:

      - Serviço de mapas da web (WMS)

        **Image format**: PNG format allows layers to be transparent,
        JPG format offers better compression and is often faster to
        load.

        **Layers**: A WMS can contain several individual layers, and you
        can specify which you want to include (comma separated). Refer
        to the WMS GetCapabilities document to see the available layers.

      - Serviço de mapa de blocos (TMS)

      - Ladrilhos XYZ (também podem ser usados para WMTS)

      - Vector tiles (Vector Style)

      When Vector Style is chosen, you can then add a value for "Before layer id". It indicates the layer id in the Vector tile (layer) stack at which the user's layers (such as Thematic, Events) will be inserted. If this value isn't set, then the user's layers will be placed on top of the layers in the Vector Style. The map service URL should be to a JSON document that follows the [Mapbox GL Style Spec](https://docs.mapbox.com/mapbox-gl-js/style-spec/). 

6.  Insira o ** URL ** para o serviço de mapas.

    > **Note**
    >
    > XYZ and TMS URLs must contain placeholders {}, for example:
    > http://{s}.tile.osm.org/{z}/{x}/{y}.png.

7.  (Optional) Enter **Source** of the map layers. The field can contain
    HTML tags if you want to link to the source.

    When you use an external map service it is important to highlight
    where the data comes from.

8.  Selecione um ** Posicionamento **:

      - **Bottom - basemap**: For the Maps app, this makes the external map layer
        selectable as the basemap (i.e. as an alternative to the DHIS2
        basemaps).

      - **Top - overlay**: For the Maps app, this allows the external map to
        be added from the Add Layer selection and placed anywhere above
        the basemap.

    Note that Vector Style layers can only be added as a basemap.

9.  (Opcional) Adicione uma legenda.

    Você pode adicionar uma legenda de duas maneiras:

      - Select a predefined **Legend** to describe the colors of the map
        layer.

        > **Tip**
        >
        > Click **Add new** to create legends that you're missing. In
        > the form that opens, create the legends you need. When you're
        > done, click **Refresh values**.

      - Enter a link to an external image legend in **Legend image
        URL**.

        These are often provided for WMS. See under LegendURL in the WMS
        GetCapabilites document.

10. Clique em **Salvar**.

### Clonar objetos de metadados { #clone_metadata } 

Cloning a data element or other objects can save time when you create
many similar objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to clone.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Clonar **.

3.  Modifique as opções que você deseja.

4.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Excluir objetos de metadados { #delete-metadata-objects } 

> **Note**
>
> You can only delete a data element and other data element objects if
> no data is associated to the data element itself.

> **Warning**
>
> Any data set that you delete from the system is irrevocably lost. All
> data entry forms, and section forms which may have been developed will
> also be removed. Make sure that you have made a backup of your
> database before deleting any data set in case you need to restore it
> at some point in time.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to delete.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Excluir **.

3.  Clique em ** Confirmar **.

### Exibir detalhes de objetos de metadados { #display-details-of-metadata-objects } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to view.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Show
    details**.

### Traduzir objetos de metadados { #translate-metadata-objects } 

DHIS2 provides functionality for translations of database content, for
example data elements, data element groups, indicators, indicator groups
or organisation units. You can translate these elements to any number of
locales. A locale represents a specific geographical, political, or
cultural region.

> **Tip**
>
> To activate a translation, open the **System Settings** app, click \>
> **Appearance** and select a language.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to translate.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Traduzir **.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > If you want to translate an organisation unit level, click
    > directly on the **Translate** icon next to each list item.

3.  Selecione um local.

4.  Digite um ** Nome **, ** Nome curto ** e ** Descrição **.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

## Gerenciar exibições SQL { #maintenance_sql_view } 

The SQL View functionality of DHIS2 will store the SQL view definition
internally, and then materialize the view when requested.

Database administrators must be careful about creating database views
directly in the DHIS2 database. For instance, when the resource tables
are generated, all of them will first be dropped and then re-created. If
any SQL views depend on these tables, an integrity violation exception
will be thrown and the process will be aborted.

The SQL views are dropped in reverse alphabetical order based on their
names in DHIS2, and created in regular alphabetical order. This allows
you to have dependencies between SQL views, given that views only depend
on other views which come earlier in the alphabetical order. For
instance, "ViewB" can safely depend on "ViewA". Otherwise, having views
depending on other view result in an integrity violation error.

### Criação de uma nova visão SQL { #creating-a-new-sql-view } 

To create a new SQL view, click **Apps** \> **Maintenance**
\> **Other** \> **SQL View** and click the Add **+** button.


![](resources/images/maintenance/create_sql_view.PNG)

The "Name" attribute of the SQL view will be used to determine the name
of the table that DHIS2 will create when the view is materialized by the
user. The "Description" attribute allows one to provide some descriptive
text about what the SQL view actually does.

The "SQL type" attribute allows the creation of three kinds of views:
  - A "View" is stored in the database and regenerated when queried
  - A "Materialized View" is stored in the database and its results
    are cached in the database
  - A "Query" is not stored in the database

Finally, the "SQL query" should contain the SQL view definition.

Only SQL "SELECT" statements are allowed and certain sensitive tables 
(i.e., user information) are not accessible.

Press "Save" to store the SQL view definition. If you created a "View"
or a "Materialized View", you must also "Execute query" to finish the
creation of the SQL view.

Keep in mind that the the columns returned by the used SELECT statement
become table columns, that means they must be of a valid table column
type. When functions are used it might be necessary to explicitly cast
the result to a type by adding `::{TYPE}` after the function.

For example, instead of `jsonb_each` (which would return a record type
that cannot be a column type) use `jsonb_each_text` and cast the result
to `text`, like in the below sample:

```sql
select jsonb_each_text(eventdatavalues)::text from ...
```

### SQL views that call other SQL views { #sql-views-that-call-other-sql-views } 

If you wish to make a SQL view that can be called be other SQL views,
then its **SQL type** must be either "View" or a "Materialized View"
(not "Query"). It also must have **Execute query** run on it before
being called.

For instance, if you created a view named **Data element count**
with SQL type "View" and this SQL:

```sql
select count(*) as count from dataelement;
```

...then you could run **Execute query** from the context menu and
create a second SQL view named **More than 100 data elements** with
this SQL:

```sql
select case when count > 100 then 1 else 0 end as result from _view_data_element_count;
```

### Gerenciamento SQL View { #sql-view-management } 

In order to utilize the SQL views, simply click the view and from the
context menu, choose "Execute query". Once the process is completed, you
will be informed that a table has been created. The name of the table
will be provided, and is composed from the "Description" attribute
provided in the SQL view definition. Once the view has been generated,
you can view it by clicking the view again, and selecting "Show SQL
View".

> **Tip**
>
> If you have a view which depends on another view, you should be
> careful about how the views are named. When analytics is run on the
> DHIS2 server, all views must be dropped, and are recreated. When
> analytics starts, the views are dropped in alphabetical order, and
> then recreated in reverse alphabetical order. Thus, if view A depends
> on view B, it must appear before view B in alphabetical order. If it
> appears after view B in alphabetical order, analytics may fail, as the
> view with dependencies will not be dropped in the correct order.

## Gerenciar localidades { #maintenance_locale_management } 

It is possible to create custom locales in DHIS2. In addition to the
locales available through the system, you might want to add a custom
locale such as "English" and "Zambia" to the system. This would allow
you to translate metadata objects to local languages, or to account for
slight variants between countries which use a common metadata
definition.


![](resources/images/maintenance/locale_management.png)

The locale is composed of a language along with a country. Select the
desired values and press "Add". This custom locale will now be available
as one of the translation locales in the system.

## Editar vários grupos de objetos de uma vez { #edit_multiple_object_groups } 

The **Metadata group editor** in the **Maintenance** app allows you to
edit multiple object groups at the same time. You can edit the following
objects types:



Table: Object types in the Metadata group editor

| Object type | Available functions |
|---|---|
| Category option ||
| Category option group ||
| Elemento de dados | Add one data element to multiple data element groups<br> <br>Remove one data element from multiple data element groups |
| Data element group | Add multiple data elements to one data element group<br> <br>Remove multiple data elements from one data element group |
| Indicador | Add one indicator to multiple indicator groups<br> <br>Remove one indicator from multiple indicator groups |
| Indicator group | Add multiple indicators to one indicator group<br> <br>Remove multiple indicators from one indicator group |

### Editar vários objetos em um grupo de objetos { #edit-multiple-objects-in-an-object-group } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Manutenção ** e clique em ** Editor de grupo de metadados **.

2.  Clique em ** Gerenciar itens no grupo **.

3.  Selecione um tipo de grupo de objetos, por exemplo ** Grupos de indicadores **.

4.  Selecione um grupo de objetos, por exemplo ** HIV **.

5.  In the left-hand list, select the object(s) you want to add to the
    object group and click the right arrow.

6.  In the right-hand list, select the object(s) you want to remove from
    the object group and click the left arrow.

### Editar um objeto em vários grupos de objetos { #edit-an-object-in-multiple-object-groups } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Manutenção ** e clique em ** Editor de grupo de metadados **.

2.  Clique em ** Gerenciar grupos para o item **.

3.  Selecione um tipo de objeto, por exemplo ** Indicadores **.

4.  Selecione um objeto, por exemplo ** cobertura ANC LLITN **.

5.  In the left-hand list, select the objects group(s) you want to add
    the object to and click the right arrow.

6.  In the right-hand list, select the object group(s) you want to
    remove the object from and click the left arrow.



# Configure programas no aplicativo de manutenção { #configure_programs_in_maintenance_app } 

## Sobre programas { #about_program_maintenance_app } 

Traditionally, public health information systems have been reporting
aggregated data of service provision across its health programs. This
does not allow you to trace the people provided with these services. In
DHIS2, you can define your own programs with stages. These programs are
a essential part of the "tracker" functionality which lets you track
individual records. You can also track other ‘entities’ such as wells or
insurances. You can create two types of programs:



Table: Program types

| Program type | Descrição | Examples of use |
|---|---|---|
| Event program | Single event *without* registration program (anonymous program or SEWoR)<br> <br>Anonymous, individual events are tracked through the health system. No person or entity is attached to these individual transactions.<br> <br>Has only one program stage. | To record health cases without registering any information into the system.<br> <br>To record survey data or surveillance line-listing. |
| Single stage Tracker program | Single event *with* registration program (SEWR)<br> <br>An entity (person, commodity, etc.) is tracked through each individual transaction with the health system<br> <br>Has only one program stage.<br> <br>A tracked entity instance (TEI) can only enroll in the program once. | To record birth certificate and death certificate. |
| Multi-stage Tracker program | Multi events *with* registration program (MEWR)<br> <br>An entity (person, commodity, etc.) is tracked through each individual transaction with the health system<br> <br>Has multiple program stages. | Mother Health Program with stages as ANC Visit (2-4+), Delivery, PNC Visit. |

To create a program, you must first configure several types of metadata
objects. You create these metadata objects in the **Maintenance** app.



Table: Program metadata objects in the Maintenance app

| Object type | Descrição | Available functions |
|---|---|---|
| Event program | A program to record single event without registration | Create, edit, share, delete, show details and translate |
| Tracker program | A program to record single or multiple events with registration | Create, edit, share, delete, show details and translate |
| Program indicator | An expression based on data elements and attributes of tracked entities which you use to calculate values based on a formula. | Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate |
| Program rule | Allows you to create and control dynamic behaviour of the user interface in the **Tracker Capture** and **Event Capture** apps. | Create, edit, clone, delete, show details and translate |
| Program rule variable | Variables you use to create program rule expressions. | Create, edit, clone, delete, show details and translate |
| Relationship type | Defines the relationship between tracked entity A and tracked entity B, for example mother and child. | Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate |
| Tipo de entidade rastreada | Types of entities which can be tracked through the system. Can be anything from persons to commodities, for example a medicine or a person.<br> <br>A program must have one tracked entity. To enrol a tracked entity instance into a program, the tracked entity of an entity and tracked entity of a program must be the same.<br>      <br>    **Note**<br>     <br>    A program must be specified with only one tracked entity. Only tracked entity as same as the tracked entity of program can enroll into that program. | Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate |
| Atributo de entidade rastreada | Used to register extra information for a tracked entity.<br> <br>Can be shared between programs. | Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate |
| Programa | A program consist of program stages. | Create, edit, share, delete, assign to organisation units, show details and translate |
| Estágio do programa | A program stage defines which actions should be taken at each stage. | Create, edit, share, change sort order, delete, show details and translate |
| Program indicator group | A group of program indicators | Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate |
| Validation rule | A validation rule is based on an expression which defines a relationship between data element values. | Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate |
| Program notification | Automated message reminder<br> <br>Set reminders to be automatically sent to enrolled tracked entity instances before scheduled appointments and after missed visits. | Create, edit and delete |
| Program stage notification | Automated message reminder<br> <br>Set reminders to be automatically sent whenever a program stage is completed, or before or after the due date. | Create, edit and delete |

## Configure programas de eventos no aplicativo de manutenção { #configure_event_program_in_maintenance_app } 

### Sobre programas de eventos { #about_event_program } 

Single event *without* registration programs are called event programs.
You configure them in the **Maintenance** app. Event programs can have
three types of data entry forms:



Table: Types of data entry forms for event programs

| Form type | Descrição |
|---|---|
| Básico | Lists all data elements which belong to the program. You can change the order of the data elements. |
| Section | A section groups data elements. You can then arrange the order of the sections to create the desired layout of the data entry form. |
| Custom | Defines the data entry form as HTML page. |

> **Note**
>
>   - Custom forms takes precedence over section forms if both are
>     present.
>
>   - If no custom or section form are defined, the basic form will be
>     used.
>
>   - The Android apps only supports section forms.

You can create *program notifications* for event programs. The
notifications are sent either via the internal DHIS2 messaging system,
via e-mail or via text messages (SMS). You can use program notifications
to, for example, send an automatic reminder to a tracked entity 10 days
before a scheduled appointment. You use the program’s tracked entity
attributes (for example first name) and program parameters (for example
enrollment date) to create a notification template. In the
**Parameters** field, you'll find a list of available tracked entity
attributes and program parameters.

### Fluxo de trabalho: crie um programa de evento { #workflow_event_program } 

1.  Insira os detalhes do programa do evento.

2.  Atribuir elementos de dados.

3.  Crie formulário (s) de entrada de dados: ** Básico **, ** Seção ** ou ** Personalizado **.

4.  Atribua o programa à (s) unidade (s) de organização.

5.  Crie notificações de programa.

### Crie ou edite um programa de evento { #create_event_program } 

#### Insira os detalhes do programa do evento { #enter-event-program-details } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo de ** Manutenção ** e clique em ** Programa ** \> ** Programa **.

2.  Clique no botão Adicionar e selecione ** Programa de Evento ** no menu pop-up.

3.  Insira os detalhes do programa e clique em Avançar.


    | Field | Description |
    |---|---|
    | **Name** | The name of the program. |
    | **Color** | Color used for this program in the data capture apps. |
    | **Icon** | Icon used for this program in the data capture apps. |
    | **Short name** | A short name of the program. The short name is used as the default chart or table title in the analytics apps. |
    | **Description** | A detailed description of the program. |
    | **Version** | The version of the program. This is used for example when people collect data offline in an Android implementation. When they go online and synchronize their metadata, they should get the latest version of the program. |
    | **Category combination** | The category combination you want to use. The default setting is **None**. |
    | **Open days after category option end date** | If you selected a category combination other than None, you may enter zero or a positive number. This lets you enter data for this program for a category option up to the specified number of days after that category option's end date.    |
    | **Data approval workflow** | The data approval workflow you want to use. The default setting is **No value**. |
    | **Completed events expiry date** | Defines the number of days for which you can edit a completed event. This means that when an event is completed and the specified number of expiry days has passed, the event is locked.<br>     <br>If you set "Completed events expiry days" to 10", an event is locked ten days after the completion date. After this date you can no longer edit the event. |
    | **Expiry period type**<br>     <br>**Expiry days** | The expiry days defines for how many days after the end of the previous period, an event can be edited. The period type is defined by the expiry period type. This means that when the specified number of expiry days has passed since the end date of the previous period, the events from that period are locked.<br>     <br>If you set the expiry type to "Monthly" and the expiry days to "10" and the month is October, then you can't add or edit an event to October after the 10th of November. |
    | **Block entry form after completed** | Select checkbox to block the entry form after completion of the event of this program.<br>     <br>This means that the data in the entry form can't be changed until you reset the status to incomplete. |
    | **Feature type** | Sets whether the program is going to capture a geographical feature type or not. <br>- **None**   Nothing is captured. <br>- **Polygon**   An area is captured. For single event programs the area will be the area representing the event being captured. For tracker programs, the area will represent the area of the enrollment. <br>- **Point**   A point/coordinate is captured. For single event programs the point will be representing the event being captured. For tracker programs, the point will represent the enrollment.      |
    | **Validation strategy** | Sets the server and client side validation requirement. <br><br>Data type validation is always performed regardless of the validation strategy. An integer field is never stored containing text, for example. <br>- **On complete**  This option will enforce required field and error messages to be fixed when completing the event, but the event can be saved to the server without passing these validation requirements. For legacy reasons, this is always the validation strategy for tracker programs, where each data value in the event is stored to the server while entering data. <br>- **On update and insert**   This option will enforce required field validation when saving the event to the server regardless of the completion status. When using this option no events can be stored without passing validations. |
    | **Pre-generate event UID** | Select checkbox to pre-generate unique event id numbers. |
    | **Description of report date** | Type a description of the report date.<br>     <br>This description is displayed in the case entry form. |

1.  Clique próximo.

#### Atribuir elementos de dados { #assign_data_elements } 

1.  Clique em ** Atribuir elementos de dados **.

2.  In the list of available items, double-click the data elements you
    want to assign to the event program.

3.  (Opcional) Para cada elemento de dados, adicione configurações adicionais:


    | Setting | Description |
    |---|---|
    | **Compulsory** | The value of this data element must be filled into data entry form before you can complete the event. |
    | **Allow provided elsewhere** | Specify if the value of this data element comes from other facility, not in the facility where this data is entered. |
    | **Display in reports** | Displays the value of this data element into the single event without registration data entry function. |
    | **Date in future** | Will allow user to select a date in future for date data elements. |
    | **Mobile render type** | Can be used to select different render types for mobile devices. Available options vary depending on the data element's value type. For example, for a numerical value you may select "Default", "Value", "Slider", "Linear scale", and "Spinner". |
    | **Desktop render type** | WARNING: NOT IMPLEMENTED YET.<br>     <br>Can be used to select different render types for desktop (i.e. the web interface). Available options vary depending on the data element's value type. For example, for a numerical value you may select "Default", "Value", "Slider", "Linear scale", and "Spinner". |

4.  Clique próximo.

#### Crie formulários de entrada de dados { #create_data_entry_forms } 

The data entry forms decide how the data elements will be displayed to
the user in the **Event Capture** app.

1.  Clique em ** Criar formulário de entrada de dados **.

2.  Clique em ** Básico **, ** Seção ** ou ** Personalizado **.

3.  To create a **Basic** data entry form: Drag and drop the data
    elements in the order you want.

4.  Para criar um formulário de entrada de dados de ** Seção **:

    1.  Click the add button and enter a section's name, description and
        render type for desktop and mobile.

    2.  Clique na seção para que seja destacada por uma linha preta.

    3.  Add data elements by clicking the plus sign next to the data
        elements' names.

    4.  Repita as etapas acima até ter todas as seções de que precisa.

    5.  Change the section order: click the options menu, then drag the
        section to the place you want.

5.  To create a **Custom** data entry from: Use the WYSIWYG editor to
    create a completely customized form. If you select **Source**, you
    can paste HTML code directly in the editing area. You can also
    insert images for example flags or logos.

6.  Clique próximo.

#### Acesso { #access } 

Access options decide who can capture data for the program or view/edit
the program's metadata. A program can be shared to organisation units,
and in addition, the main program and any program stages' access options
can be configured through the **Sharing dialog**. Access options are
available in the **Access** tab.

Atribuir unidades de organização:

1.  In the organisation tree, double-click the organisation units you
    want to add to the program to.

    You can locate an organisation unit in the tree by expanding the
    branches (click on the arrow symbol), or by searching for it by
    name. The selected organisation units display in orange.

Alterar funções e acesso:

1.  Role para baixo até a seção ** Funções e acesso **.

    The first row shows the main program's access options, and each
    subsequent row shows the options of one program stage. Program
    stages with a warning icon (exclamation mark) contain access options
    that deviate from the main program, meaning they are accessed by a
    different combination of users.

2.  Clique em uma das linhas e a ** caixa de diálogo Compartilhamento ** será exibida.

3.  Modify the access options accordingly. See documentation on the
    sharing dialog for details.

4.  Clique no botão ** Aplicar **.

5.  Repeat the process for each program/program stage. You can also copy
    all access options from the main program to your child programs:

    1.  Select the program stages you want to have similar access
        options as the main program by toggling the checkboxes on the
        right hand side of the program stages. You can also choose to
        **Select all** program stages, **Deselect all** program stages
        or **Select similar** stages, in terms of access options, to
        that of the main program. Similar stages are toggled by default.

    2.  Clique em ** Aplicar aos estágios selecionados **

#### Criar notificações de programa { #create_program_notifications } 

1.  Crie a mensagem que deseja enviar:

    1.  Clique em ** O que enviar? **.

    2.  Insira um **nome**.

    3.  Create the **Subject template**: Double-click the parameters in
        the **Template variables** field to add them to your subject.

        > **Note**
        >
        > The subject is not included in text messages.

    4.  Create the **Message template**: Double-click the parameter
        names in the **Template variables** list to add them to your
        message.

        Dear A{w75KJ2mc4zz}, You're now enrolled in V{program\_name}.

2.  Define *when* you want to send the message:

    1.  Clique em ** Quando enviar? **.

    2.  Selecione um ** Gatilho de notificação **.


        | Notification trigger | Description |
        |---|---|
        | Program stage completion | The program stage notification is sent when the program stage is completed |
        | Days scheduled (due date) | The program stage notification is sent XX number of days before or after the due date<br>         <br>You need to enter the number of days before or after the scheduled date that the notification will be sent. |

3.  Define *who* you want to send the message to:

    1.  Clique em ** Quem enviar? **.

    2.  Selecione um ** Destinatário da notificação **.


        | Notification recipient | Description |
        |---|---|
        | Tracked entity instance | Receives program notifications via e-mail or text message.<br>         <br>To receive a program notification, the recipient must have an e-mail address or a phone number attribute. |
        | Organisation unit contact | Receives program notifications via e-mail or text message.<br>         <br>To receive a program notification, the receiving organisation unit must have a registered contact person with e-mail address and phone number. |
        | Users at organisation unit | All users registered to the selected organisation unit receive program notifications via the internal DHIS2 messaging system. |
        | User group | All members of the selected user group receive the program notifications via the internal DHIS2 messaging system |
        | Program | TBA |

    3.  Click **Save**.

4.  Repita as etapas acima para criar todas as notificações de programa de que você precisa.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

> **Note**
>
> You configure when the program notifications are sent in the **Data
> Administration** app \> **Scheduling** \> **Program notifications
> scheduler**.
>
>   - Click **Run now** to send the program notifications immediately.
>
>   - Select a time and click **Start** to schedule the program
>     notifications to be send at a specific
time.

### Informações de referência: Parâmetros de notificação do programa { #reference_information_event_program_notification_parameters } 



Table: Program notification parameters to use in program notifications

| Notification type | Variable name | Variable code |
|---|---|---|
| Programa | Current date | `V{current_date}` |
|| Days since enrollment date | `V{days_since_enrollment_date}` |
|| Enrollment date | `V{enrollment_date}` |
|| Incident date | `V{incident_date}` |
|| Organisation unit name | `V{org_unit_name}` |
|| Program name | `V{program_name}` |
| Estágio do programa | Current date | `V{current_date}` |
|| Days since due date | `V{days_since_due_date}` |
|| Days until due date | `V{days_until_due_date}` |
|| Due date | `V{due_date}` |
|| Organisation unit name | `V{org_unit_name}` |
|| Program name | `V{program_name}` |
|| Program stage name | `V{program_stage_name}` |
|| Event status | `V{event_status}` |


## Configure programas rastreadores no aplicativo de manutenção { #configure_tracker_program_in_Maintenance_app } 

### Sobre os programas Tracker { #about-tracker-programs } 
Single or multiple event programs *with* registration are called Tracker programs. A program must be specified with only one tracked entity. Only tracked entities that are the same as the tracked entity of program can enroll into that
program. A program needs several types of metadata that you create in the **Maintenance** apps.

### Fluxo de trabalho: crie um programa rastreador { #workflow_tracker_program } 

1.  Insira os detalhes do programa rastreador.

2.  Insira os detalhes da inscrição.

3.  Atribuir atributos e criar ** seção ** ou formulário de registro ** personalizado **.

4. Crie estágios do programa.

5. Configure o acesso e atribua às unidades de organização.

6. Criar programa e notificação (ões) de estágio do programa.

### Crie ou edite um programa Tracker { #create-or-edit-a-tracker-program } 

1. Abra o aplicativo de ** Manutenção ** e clique em ** Programa ** \> ** Programa **.

2. Clique no botão Adicionar e selecione ** Programa Rastreador ** no menu pop-up.

#### Insira os detalhes do programa { #tracker_enter_programs_details } 

| Campo | Descrição |
|---|---|
| **Nome** | The name of the program. |
| **Cor** | Color used for this program in Tracker capture. |
| **Ícone** | Icon used for this program in Tracker capture |
| **Nome curto** |  A short name of the program. The short name is used as the default chart or table title in the analytics apps.  |
| **Descrição** | A detailed description of the program. |
| **Version** |  The version of the program. This is used for example when people collect data offline in an Android implementation. When they go online and synchronize their metadata, they should get the latest version of the program.  |
| **Tracked Entity Type** |  The tracked entity type you want to use. A program can only have one type of tracked entity.  |
| **Category combination** |  The category combination you want to use. The default setting is **None**.  |
| **Open days after category option end date** | If you selected a category combination other than None, you may enter zero or a positive number. This lets you enter data for this program for a category option up to the specified number of days after that category option's end date.    |
| **Display front page list** |  Select checkbox to display a list of Tracked Entity Instances in Tracker Capture. If not selected, the Search will be displayed.  |
| **First stage appears on registration page** |  Select checkbox to display the first program stage together with the registration (enrollment).  |
| **Access level** | Choose the access level of the program. |
| **Completed events expiry days** |  Defines the number of days for which you can edit a completed event. This means that when an event is completed and the specified number of expiry days has passed, the event is locked. <br> <br> If you set "Completed events expiry days" to 10", an event is locked ten days after the completion date. After this date you can no longer edit the event.  |
| **Expiry period type**<br> <br>**Expiry days** |  The expiry days defines for how many days after the end of the previous period, an event can be edited. The period type is defined by the expiry period type. This means that when the specified number of expiry days has passed since the end date of the previous period, the events from that period are locked. <br> <br> If you set the expiry type to "Monthly" and the expiry days to "10" and the month is October, then you can't add or edit an event to October after the 10th of November.  |
| **Minimum number of attributes required to search** |  Specify the number of tracked entity attributes that needs to be filled in to search for Tracked Entities in the Program.  |
| **Maximum number of tracked entity instances to return in search** |  Specify the maximum number of tracked entity instances that should be returned in a search. Enter 0 for no limit.  |

#### Enter enrollment details { #enter_enrollment_details } 

| Campo | Descrição |
|---|---|
| **Allow future enrollment dates** |Select checkbox if you want to allow tracked entity instances to be enrolled in the program on a future date.|
| **Allow future incident dates** |Select checkbox if you want to allow the incident date in the program to be on a future date.|
| **Only enroll once (per tracked entity instance lifetime)** |Select checkbox if you want a tracked entity to be able to enroll only once in a program. This setting is useful for example in child vaccination or post-mortem examination programs where it wouldn’t make sense to enroll a tracked entity more than once.|
| **Show incident date** |This setting allows you to show or hide the incident date field when a tracked entity enroll in the program.|
| **Description of incident date** | Type a description of the incident date<br> <br>For example:<br> <br>In an immunization program for child under 1 year old, the incident date is the child's birthday. <br> <br>In a maternal program, the incident date is the date of last menstrual period.  |
| **Type a description of the enrollment date** |The date when the tracked entity is enrolled into the program|
| **Ignore overdue events** |When a tracked entity enrolls into the program, the events corresponding to the program stages are created. If you select this checkbox, the system will not generate overdue events.|
| **Feature type** |Sets whether the program is going to capture a geographical feature type or not. <br> * **None:** Nothing is captured.<br> * **Polygon:** An area is captured. For single event programs the area will be the area representing the event being captured. For tracker programs, the area will represent the area of the enrollment. <br> * **Point:** A point/coordinate is captured. For single event programs the point will be representing the event being captured. For tracker programs, the point will represent the enrollment. |
| **Related program** |Choose a Tracker program which is related to the program you are creating, for example an ANC and a Child program.|


#### Atribuir atributos de entidade rastreados. { #assign_tracked_entity_attributes } 

  1. In the list of **Available program tracked entity attributes**, double-click the
        attributes you want to assign to the program.

  2. (Opcional) Para cada atributo atribuído, adicione configurações adicionais:

| Setting | Descrição |
|---|---|
| **Display in list** |                          Displays the value of this attribute in the list of tracked                         entity instances in Tracker capture.                      |
| **Mandatory** |                          The value of this attribute must be filled into data entry                         form before you can complete the event.                      |
| **Date in future** |                          Will allow user to select a date in future for date                         attributes.                      |
| **Mobile render type** |                          Can be used to select different render types for mobile                         devices. Available options vary depending on the attribute's                         value type. For example, for a numerical value you may                         select "Default", "Value",                         "Slider", "Linear scale", and                         "Spinner".                      |
| **Desktop render type** | WARNING: NOT IMPLEMENTED YET.<br>                     <br>                         Can be used to select different render types for desktop                         (i.e. the web interface). Available options vary depending                         on the attribute's value type. For example, for a numerical                         value you may select "Default", "Value",                         "Slider", "Linear scale", and                         "Spinner".                      |

3. Criar formulário de registro

   O formulário de registro define como os atributos serão exibidos ao usuário em aplicativos de consumo, como Android e Tracker Capture.

    1. Clique em ** Criar formulário de registro **.

    2. Clique em ** Seção ** ou ** Personalizado **.

    3. Para criar um formulário de ** Seção **:

        1. Clique no botão Adicionar e insira o nome da seção, a descrição e o tipo de renderização para desktop e celular.
        2. Clique na seção para que seja destacada por uma borda preta.
        3. Adicione elementos de dados clicando no sinal de mais ao lado do nome dos elementos de dados que deseja adicionar.
        4. Repeat above steps until you have all the sections you need.
            To change the section order: click the options menu, then drag the section to the place you want.  

    4. Para criar um formulário de registro ** Personalizado **: Use o editor WYSIWYG para criar um formulário totalmente personalizado. Se você selecionar Código-fonte, poderá colar o código HTML diretamente na área de edição. Você também pode inserir imagens como bandeiras ou logotipos.

    5. Clique em adicionar estágio.


#### Crie estágios do programa { #create_program_stages } 

A program consist of program stages. A program stage defines which
actions should be taken at each stage.

> ** Nota **
>
> As alterações em um estágio do programa não são salvas até que você salve o programa.

1. Clique no sinal de mais para criar um estágio do programa.
2. Enter program stage details:
    1. Insira um **nome**.
    2.  (Optional) select a **Color** and an **Icon** that will be used
by the data capture apps to identify this program stage.
    3. Insira uma ** Descrição **.
    4. Enter the required number of days into the **Scheduled days from start** field: The first event in this program stage will be scheduled this many days after the enrollment or the incident date, depending on the configuration. If **Show incident date** in **Enrollment details** is configured, the system will use incident date as start. If **Genereate events based on enrollment date** in **Program stage details** is configured the system will use enrollment date as start.
3. Insira os detalhes do estágio do programa que podem ser repetidos.
    1. Especifique se o estágio do programa é ** Repetível ** ou não.
    2. Selecione um ** Tipo de período **.
    3. Clear **Display generate event box after completed** if you
    don't want to display *Create new event box* to create new event
    for a repeatable stage after you click *Complete* for an event
    of the stage in data entry form. This field is selected by
    default.
    5. Enter **Standard interval days**. This value will be the suggested interval between the last event in a repeatable stage and the scheduled date of the next event.
    6. (Optional) Select a  **Default next scheduled date**. This will show a list of assigned data elements of type **date**. If an element is selected, the Tracker client will use this as the default scheduled date. The data element can be used by program rules to dynamically schedule intervals between events.
4. Insira os detalhes do formulário


  | Opção | Açao |
 |---|---|
 | **Auto-generate event** |  Clear check box to prevent creating an event of this program  stage automatically when a entity is enrolled in the program.  |
 | **Open data entry form after enrollment** |  Select check box to automatically open the event of this  stage as soon as the entity has enrolled into the program.  |
 | **Report date to use** | If you have selected the  **Open data entry form after enrollment** check  box, also select a **Report date to use**:  **Date of incident** or  **Date of enrollment**.  <br>  This is the date used as report date for an event that has  been opened automatically.  <br>  <br>  If the **Report date to use** is selected as  one of those two ('incident date'/'enrollment date'), in  Dashboard, the 'Report date' of the event will be set as one  of those two.  |
 | **User assignment of events** |  Select check box to enable user assignment of the program  stage.  <br>  <br>  This means that in Tracker capture there will be a list of  users to which the event can be assigned.  |
 | **Block entry form after completed** |  Select check box to block the entry form after completion of  the event of this stage.  <br>  <br>  This means that the data in the entry form can't be changed  until you reset the status to incomplete.  |
 | **Ask user to complete program when stage is   completed** |  Select check box to trigger a pop-up which asks the user if  he/she wants to create the event of next stage.  |
 | **Ask user to create new event when stage is   complete** |  Select check box to trigger a pop-up which asks the users if  he/she wants to create a new event of this stage when an  event of this stage is completed.  <br>  <br>  This property is active only if you have selected  **Repeatable**.  |
 | **Generate events by enrollment date** |  Verifique nele as datas de vencimento de geração automática de eventos das fases do programa deste programa com base na data de inscrição. Se não estiver marcada, as datas de vencimento são geradas com base na data do incidente.  |
 | **Hide due dates** | Select checkbox to hide due dates for events. |
 | **Feature type** |  Sets whether the program is going to capture a geographical  feature type or not.  <br>  * **None:** Nothing is captured.<br> * **Polygon:** An area is captured. For single  event programs the area will be the area representing the  event being captured. For tracker programs, the area will  represent the area of the enrollment. <br> * **Point:** A point/coordinate is captured. For  single event programs the point will be representing the  event being captured. For tracker programs, the point will  represent the enrollment. |
 | **Pre-generate event UID** | Select check box to pre-generate unique event id numbers. |
 | **Description of report date** | Type a description of the report date.<br>  <br>This description is displayed in the data entry form. |
 | **Description of due date** | Type a description of the due date. |
 | **Referral*** | Flag to indicate if program stage is referral or not. |

5.  Atribua elementos de dados ao estágio do programa:

    1.  In the list of **Available data elements**, double-click the
        data elements you want to assign to the program stage.

    2.  For each assigned data element, review the properties. You can
        select:


| Opção | Açao |
|---|---|
| **Obrigatório** |                      The value of this data element must be filled into data                     entry form before completing the event.                  |
| **Allow provided elsewhere** |                      Specify if the value of this data element comes from other                     facility, not in the facility where this data is entered.                  |
| **Display in reports** |                      Display the value of this data element into the single event                     without registration data entry function.                  |
| **Date in future** | Allow to select a date in future for date data elements. |
| **Skip synchronization** |                      Allow data element to be skipped when running data                     synchronization jobs.                  |
| **Mobile render type** |                      Can be used to select different render types for mobile                     devices. Available options vary depending on the attribute's                     value type. For example, for a numerical value you may                     select "Default", "Value",                     "Slider", "Linear scale", and                     "Spinner".                  |
| **Desktop render type** | WARNING: NOT IMPLEMENTED YET.<br>                 <br>                     Can be used to select different render types for desktop                     (i.e. the web interface). Available options vary depending                     on the attribute's value type. For example, for a numerical                     value you may select "Default", "Value",                     "Slider", "Linear scale", and                     "Spinner".                  |

6. Crie formulários de entrada de dados para a fase do programa

    The data entry forms decide how the data elements will be displayed to
    the user in the **Tracker Capture** app.

   1.  Clique em ** Criar formulário de entrada de dados **.

   2.  Clique em ** Básico **, ** Seção ** ou ** Personalizado **.

   3.  To create a **Basic** data entry form: Drag and drop the data
       elements in the order you want.

   4.  Para criar um formulário de entrada de dados de ** Seção **:

       1.  Click the add button and enter a section's name, description and
           render type for desktop and mobile.

       2.  Clique na seção para que seja destacada por uma borda preta.

       3.  Add data elements by clicking the plus sign next to the data
           elements' names.

       4.  Repita as etapas acima até ter todas as seções de que precisa.

       5.  Change the section order: click the options menu, then drag the
           section to the place you want.

   5.  To create a **Custom** data entry from: Use the WYSIWYG editor to
           create a completely customized form. If you select **Source**, you
           can paste HTML code directly in the editing area. You can also
           insert images for example flags or logos.

   6.  Clique em adicionar estágio.


#### Acesso { #tracker_program_access } 

Access options decide who can capture data for the program or view/edit
the program's metadata. A program can be shared to organisation units,
and in addition, the main program and any program stages' access options
can be configured through the **Sharing dialog**. Access options are
available in the **Access** tab.

Atribuir unidades de organização:

1.  In the organisation tree, double-click the organisation units you
    want to add to the program to.

    You can locate an organisation unit in the tree by expanding the
    branches (click on the arrow symbol), or by searching for it by
    name. The selected organisation units display in orange.

Alterar funções e acesso:

1.  Role para baixo até a seção ** Funções e acesso **.

    The first row shows the main program's access options, and each
    subsequent row shows the options of one program stage. Program
    stages with a warning icon (exclamation mark) contain access options
    that deviate from the main program, meaning they are accessed by a
    different combination of users.

2.  Clique em uma das linhas e a ** caixa de diálogo Compartilhamento ** será exibida.

3.  Modify the access options accordingly. See documentation on the
    sharing dialog for details.

4.  Clique no botão ** Aplicar **.

5.  Repeat the process for each program/program stage. You can also copy
    all access options from the main program to your child programs:

    1.  Select the program stages you want to have similar access
        options as the main program by toggling the checkboxes on the
        right hand side of the program stages. You can also choose to
        **Select all** program stages, **Deselect all** program stages
        or **Select similar** stages, in terms of access options, to
        that of the main program. Similar stages are toggled by default.

    2.  Clique em ** Aplicar aos estágios selecionados **

#### Criar notificações de programa { #create_tracker_program_notifications } 

You can create program notifications for programs with registration and
their program stages. The notifications are sent either via the internal
DHIS2 messaging system, via e-mail or via text messages (SMS). You can
use program notifications to, for example, send an automatic reminder to
a tracked entity 10 days before a scheduled appointment. You use the
program’s tracked entity attributes (for example first name) and program
parameters (for example enrollment date) to create a notification
template.


1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Program and then
    notifications**.

    A list of existing program notifications for the selected program
    opens. If the program doesn't have any program notifications, the
    list is empty.

2.  Clique no botão Adicionar e selecione ** Notificação do Programa **.

    ![](resources/images/program/what_to_send.png)
    ![](resources/images/program/where_to_send.png)
    ![](resources/images/program/who_to_send.png)

3.  Insira um **nome**.

4.  Crie o ** modelo de assunto **.

    Double-click the parameters in the **Parameters** field to add them
    to your subject.

    > **Note**
    >
    > The subject is not included in text messages.

5.  Crie o ** modelo de mensagem **.

    Double-click the parameter names in the **Parameters** field to add
    them to your message.

    Dear A{w75KJ2mc4zz}, You're now enrolled in V{program\_name}.

6.  In the **When-to-send it** field, select what should trigger the
    notification.


    | Trigger | Description | Note |
    |---|---|---|
    | Program enrollment | The program notification is sent when the TEI enrols in the program. | - |
    | Program completion | The program notification is sent when the program of TEI is completed | - |
    | Days scheduled (incident date) | The program notification is sent XX number of days before or after the incident date | You need to enter the number of days before or after the scheduled date that the notification will be send. |
    | Days scheduled (enrollment date) | The program notification is sent XX number of days before or after the enrollment date | You need to enter the number of days before or after the scheduled date that the notification will be send. |
    | Program Rule | Notification will be triggered as a result of program rule exeuction. | Program rule with ProgramRuleActionType.SENDMESSAGE need to be in place to make this trigger successful. |


7.  In the **Who-to-send-it** field, select who should receive the
    program notification.


    | Recipient type | Description | Note |
    |---|---|---|
    | Tracked entity instance | Receives program notifications via e-mail or text message. | To receive a program notification, the recipient must have an e-mail address or a phone number attribute. |
    | Organisation unit contact | Receives program notifications via e-mail or text message. | To receive a program notification, the receiving organisation unit must have a registered contact person with e-mail address and phone number. |
    | Users at organisation unit: | All users registered to the selected organisation unit receive program notifications via the internal DHIS2 messaging system. | - |
    | User group | All members of the selected user group receive the program notifications via the internal DHIS2 messaging system | - |
    | Limit To Hierarchy | Send notification only to those users who belong to any of the organisation unit in the hierarchy. | This option is only available when User Group is selected as recipient. |
    | Parent OrgUnit Only | Send notification only to those users who belong to parent organisation unit. | This option is only available when User Group is selected as recipient. |
    | Program Attribute | TrackedEntityAttribute can also be selected as recipient. | This parameter will only be effective if TrackedEntityAttribute value type is PHONE_NUMBER/EMAIL. |

8.  Clique em **Salvar**.


### Crie uma notificação de estágio do programa { #create-a-program-stage-notification } 

![](resources/images/program/what_to_send-psnt.png)

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Program and then
    notifications**.

    A list of existing program stage notifications for the selected
    program stage opens. If the program stage doesn't have any program
    stage notifications, the list is empty.

2.  Clique no botão Adicionar e selecione ** Notificação de estágio do programa **.

3.  Clique em ** Adicionar novo **.

4.  Insira um **nome**.

5.  Crie o ** modelo de assunto **.

    Double-click the parameter names in the **Parameters** field to add
    them to your subject.

    > **Note**
    >
    > The subject is not included in text messages.

6.  Crie o ** modelo de mensagem **.

    Double-click the parameter names in the **Parameters** field to add
    them to your message.

    Dear A{w75KJ2mc4zz}, please come to your appointment the
    V{due\_date}.

7.  In the **When-to-send-it** field, select what should trigger the
    notification.


    | Trigger | Description | Note |
    |---|---|---|
    | Program stage completion | The program stage notification is sent when the program stage is completed | - |
    | Days scheduled (due date) | The program stage notification is sent XX number of days before or after the due date | You need to enter the number of days before or after the scheduled date that the notification will be send. |
    | Program Rule | Notification will be triggered as a result of program rule execution. | Program rule with ProgramRuleActionType.SENDMESSAGE need to be in place to make this trigger successful. |

    1. **Allow notification to be sent multiple times**

        This flag can be used if notification is required to be sent multiple times. For example in case of repeatable program stage, same notification will be sent as many times as the stage is repeated.

8.  In the **Recipients** field, select who should receive the program
    stage notification. You can select:


    | Recipient type | Description | Note |
    |---|---|---|
    | Tracked entity instance | Receives program notifications via e-mail or text message. | To receive a program stage notification, the recipient must have an e-mail address or a phone number attribute. |
    | Organisation unit contact | Receives program notifications via e-mail or text message. | To receive a program stage notification, the receiving organisation unit must have a registered contact person with e-mail address and phone number.<br>     <br>The system selects the same organisation unit as where the event took place. |
    | Users at organisation unit: | All users registered to the selected organisation unit receive program notifications via the internal DHIS2 messaging system. | - |
    | User group | All members of the selected user group receive the program notifications via the internal DHIS2 messaging system | - |
    | Limit To Hierarchy | Send notification only to those users who belong to any of the organisation unit in the hierarchy. | - |
    | Parent OrgUnit Only | Send notification only to those users who belong to parent organisation unit. | - |
    | Data Element | Data Element associated with ProgramStage can be selected as recipient. | Data Element will only be effective if DataElement has value type PHONE_NUMBER/EMAIL. |
    | Tracked Entity Attribute | Tracked Entity Attribute associated with ProgramInstance/Enrollment can be selected as recipient. | Attribute will only be effective if it has value type PHONE_NUMBER/EMAIL. |
    | Web Hook | Web hooks are automated HTTP messages sent to an external URL configured in web hook URL field. Notificaiton template variables will be sent as key-value pairs in the HTTP request. | - |


10.  Clique em **Salvar**.


### Informações de referência: Parâmetros de notificação do programa { #reference_information_event_program_notification_parameters } 



Table: Program notification parameters to use in program notifications

| Notification type | Variable name | Variable code |
|---|---|---|
| Programa | Current date | `V{current_date}` |
|| Days since enrollment date | `V{days_since_enrollment_date}` |
|| Enrollment date | `V{enrollment_date}` |
|| Incident date | `V{incident_date}` |
|| Organisation unit name | `V{org_unit_name}` |
|| Program name | `V{program_name}` |
| Estágio do programa | Current date | `V{current_date}` |
|| Days since due date | `V{days_since_due_date}` |
|| Days until due date | `V{days_until_due_date}` |
|| Due date | `V{due_date}` |
|| Organisation unit name | `V{org_unit_name}` |
|| Program name | `V{program_name}` |
|| Program stage name | `V{program_stage_name}` |
|| Event organisation unit | `V{event_org_unit_id}` |
|| Enrollment organisation unit | `V{enrollment_org_unit_id}` |
|| Program stage id | `V{program_stage_id}` |
|| Program id | `V{program_id}` |
|| Program instance id/Enrollment id | `V{enrollment_id}` |
|| Tracked entity id | `V{tracked_entity_id}` |
|| Event/Execution date | `V{event_date}` |

## Configurar indicadores de programa { #configure_program_indicator } 

### Sobre os indicadores do programa { #about_program_indicators } 

Program indicators are expressions based on data elements and attributes
of tracked entities which can be used to calculate values based on a
formula. Program indicators consist of an aggregation type, an analytics
type, an expression and a filter.

Program indicators are evaluated based on the assigned aggregation type,
expression and filter. The order of evaluation is:

1.  The *filter* will filter the events which become part of the
    evaluation/aggregation routine.

2.  The *expression* will be evaluated per event.

3.  All evaluated expression values will be *aggregated* according to
    the aggregation type of the program indicator.



Table: Program indicator components

| Program rule component | Descrição |
|---|---|
| Tipo de agregação | The aggregation type determines how the program indicator will be aggregated. The following aggregation types are available:<br> * Average<br> * Average (number)<br> * Average (number, disaggregation)<br> * Average (sum in organisation unit hierarchy)<br> * Average (sum of numbers)<br> * Average (sum of numbers, disaggregation)<br> * Average (Yes/No)<br> * Count<br> * Custom<br> The "custom" aggregation type allows you to specify the aggregation type in-line in the expression. All other aggregation types are applied to the entire expression.<br> Using the "custom" aggregation type might lead to an exception of the order of evaluation described above where individual parts of the expression can be evaluated and aggregated, as opposed to the entire expression being evaluated prior to aggregation.<br> * Default<br> * Max<br> * Min<br> * None<br> * Standard deviation<br> * Sum<br> * Variance |
| Analytics type | The available analytics types are *event* and *enrollment*.<br> <br>The analytics type defines whether the program indicator is calculated based on events or program enrollments. This has an impact on what type of calculations can be made.<br> * Events implies a data source where each event exists as an independent row. This is suitable for performing aggregations such as counts and sums.<br> * Enrollments implies a data source where all events for a single enrollment is combined on the same row. This allows for calculations which can compare event data from various program stages within a program enrollment. |
| Organisation unit field | Determines which organisation unit is assigned to program indicator values.<br><br> For Event programs (without registration) the options are:<br> * Event organisation unit (default): where the event took place<br> * any data elements of value type Organisation Unit (if any) assigned to the program<br><br> For Tracker programs (with registration) and analytics type *Enrollment* the options are:<br> * Registration organisation unit: where the tracked entity instance was created<br> * Enrollment organisation unit (default): where the tracked entity instance was enrolled in this program<br> * Owner at start organisation unit: where the tracked entity instance was owned at the start of the reporting period<br> * Owner at end organisation unit: where the tracked entity instance was owned at the end of the reporting period<br><br> For Tracker programs (with registration) and analytics type *Event* the options are:<br> * Event organisation unit (default): where the event took place<br>  * any data elements of value type Organisation Unit (if any) assigned to the program<br> * Registration organisation unit: where the tracked entity instance was created<br> * Enrollment organisation unit: where the tracked entity instance was enrolled in this program<br> * Owner at start organisation unit: where the tracked entity instance was owned at the start of the reporting period<br> * Owner at end organisation unit: where the tracked entity instance was owned at the end of the reporting period |
| Analytics period boundaries | Defines the boundaries for the program indicator calculation. The boundaries determine which events or enrollments gets included in aggregations, always relative to the aggregate reporting period start and end. When creating the program indicator, the default boundaries will get preselected based on analytics type.<br> * For analytics type *event*, the default boundaries will be configured to encapsulate any events with an event date after the reporting period starts and before the reporting period ends.<br> * For analytics type *enrollment*, the default boundaries will encapsulate all enrollments with an enrollment date after the reporting date starts and before the reporting period ends. In addition, the default enrollment program indicator evaluates the newest event for all program stages regardless of date.<br> <br>It is possible to change the upper and lower boundaries to include a longer or shorter period relative to the reporting period, or delete one of the boundaries - in effect returning all data before or after a certain period. It is also possible to add more constraints, for example to make an enrollment program indicator only include event data up to a given point in time.<br> * Boundary target: Can be *incident date*, *event date*, *enrollment date* or *custom*. Designates what is being constrained by the boundary.<br> <br> *custom* is used make boundary that target either a date data element, tracked entity attribute or the presence of an event in a program stage. This is done with a custom expression on the form:<br> - Data element of type date: #{programStageUid.dataElementUid}.<br> `#{A03MvHHogjR.a3kGcGDCuk6}` <br> - Tracked entity attribute of type date: #{attributeUid}.<br> `A{GPkGfbmArby}` <br> - Presence of one event in a specific program stage: PS_EVENTDATE:programStageUid.<br> `PS_EVENTDATE:A03MvHHogjR`  <br> **Note**  This boundary target is only applicable to  Analytics type Enrollment <br> * Analytics period boundary type: Defines whether the boundary is an end boundary - starting with "before...", or a start boundary - "after...". Also defines whether the boundary relates to the end of the aggregate reporting period or the start of the aggregate reporting period.<br> * Offset period by amount: In some cases, for example cohort analytics, the boundary should be offset relative to the aggregate reporting period when running pivots and reports. The offset period by amount is used to move the current boundary either back(negative) or forward(positive) in time. The amount and period type together will determine how big the offset will be. An example can be when making a simple enrollment cohort program indicator for a 1 year cohort, it might be enough to offset each boundary of the program indicator with "-1" and "Years"<br> * Period type: See above. Can be any period, e.g. *Weekly* or *Quarterly*. |
| Expression | The expression defines how the indicator is being calculated. The expression can contain references to various entities which will be substituted with a related values when the indicator is calculated:<br> * Data elements: Will be substituted with the value of the data element for the time period and organisation unit for which the calculation is done. Refers to both program stage and data element.<br> * Attributes: Will be substituted with the value of the attribute for the person / tracked entity for which the calculation is done.<br> * Variables: Will be substituted with special values linked to the program, including incident date and date of enrollment for the person, current date and count of values in the expression for the time period and organisation unit for which the calculation is done.<br> * Constants: Will be substituted with the value of the constant.<br> <br>The expression is a mathematical expression and can also contain operators.<br> <br>For single event programs and tracker programs with analytics type *event*, the expression will be evaluated *per event*, then aggregated according to its aggregation type.<br> <br>For tracker programs with analytics type *enrollment*, the expression will be evaluated *per enrollment*, then aggregated according to its aggregation type. |
| Filtro | The filter is applied to events and filters the data source used for the calculation of the indicator. I.e. the filter is applied to the set of events before the indicator expression is being evaluated. The filter must evaluate to either true or false. It filter is applied to each individual event. If the filter evaluates to true then the event is included later in the expression evaluation, if not it is ignored. The filter can, in a similar way as expressions, contain references to data elements, attributes and constants.<br> <br>The program indicator filter can in addition use logical operators. These operators can be used to form logical expressions which ultimately evaluate to either true or false. For example you can assert that multiple data elements must be a specific value, or that specific attributes must have numerical values less or greater than a constant. |

In the **Maintenance** app, you manage the following program indicator
objects:


| Object type | Available functions |
|---|---|
| Program indicator | Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate |
| Program indicator group | Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate |

### Crie ou edite um indicador de programa { #create_program_indicator } 

> ** Nota **
>
> Um indicador de programa pertence a exatamente um programa.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Indicator** \> **Program
    indicator**.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  Selecione um ** Programa ** e digite:

      - **Nome**

      - **Nome curto**

      - **Código**

      - **Cor**

      - **Ícone**

      - **Descrição**
4.  Selecione o número de ** decimais na saída de dados **.

5.  Selecione um ** Tipo de agregação **.

6.  Selecione a se desejar ** Exibir em formato **.

7.  Atribua uma ou várias ** Legenda ** s.

8.  (Optional) Enter a **Category option combination for aggregate data
    export**.

9.  (Optional) Enter an **Attribute option combination for aggregate
    data export**.

10. Crie a expressão.

    1.  Clique em ** Editar expressão **.

    2.  Create the expression based on mathematical operators and the
        attributes, variables and constants listed to the right.

11. Crie o filtro.

    1.  Clique em ** Editar filtro **.

    2.  Create the expression based on mathematical operators and the
        attributes, variables and constants listed to the right.

12. Clique em **Salvar**.

### Criar ou editar um grupo indicador de programa { #create_program_indicator_group } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Indicator** \> **Program
    indicator group**.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  Insira ** Nome ** e ** Código **.

4.  In the list of available program indicators, double-click the
    program indicators you want to assign to your group.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Informações de referência: exemplos de expressão e filtro por tipo de valor { #reference_information_program_indicator } 

The table below shows examples of how to write expressions and filters
for different data element and attribute value types:



Table: Expression and filter examples per value type

| Value types | Example syntax |
|---|---|
| Integer<br> <br>Negative integer<br> <br>Positive or zero integer<br> <br>Positive integer<br> <br>Number<br> <br>Percentage | Numeric fields, can be used for aggregation as an expression, or in filters:<br> `#{mCXR7u4kNBW.K0A4BauXJDl} >= 3` |
| Yes/No<br> <br>Yes only | Boolean fields. Yes is translated to numeric 1, No to numeric 0. Can be used for aggregation as an expression, or in filters:<br> `#{mCXR7u4kNBW.Popa3BauXJss} == 1` |
| Text<br> <br>Long text<br> <br>Phone number<br> <br>Email | Text fields. Can be checked for equality in filters:<br> `#{mCXR7u4kNBW.L8K4BauIKsl} == 'LiteralValue'` |
| Date<br> <br>Age | Date fields. Most useful when combined with a d2:daysBetween function, which produces a number that can be aggregated as an expression or used in filters:<br> `d2:daysBetween(#{mCXR7u4kNBW.JKJKBausssl},V{enrollment_date}) > 100` <br>Can also directly be checked for equality in filters:<br> `#{mCXR7u4kNBW.JKJKBausssl} == '2011-10-28'` |

### Informações de referência: funções, variáveis e operadores para usar em expressões e filtros de indicadores de programa { #program_indicator_functions_variables_operators } 

An expression that includes both attributes, data elements and constants
looks like this:

    (A {GPkGfbmArby} + # {mCXR7u4kNBW.NFkjsNiQ9PH}) * C {bCqvfPR02Im}

An expression which uses the custom aggregation type and hence can use
inline aggregation types looks like
    this:

    (sum (# {mCXR7u4kNBW.K0A4BauXJDl} * # {mCXR7u4kNBW.NFkjsNiQ9PH}) / sum (# {mCXR7u4kNBW.NFkjsNiQ9PH})) * 100

Note how the "sum" aggregation operator is used inside the expression
itself.

#### Funções para usar em uma expressão ou filtro de indicador de programa { #functions-to-use-in-a-program-indicator-expression-or-filter } 

The program indicator expression and filter support a range of
functions. The functions can be applied to data elements and attributes:



Table: Functions to use in a program indicator expression or filter

| Função | Arguments | Descrição |
|---|---|---|
| d2: hasValue | (object) | Returns true if the data element/attribute has a value. Can be used in filters to distinguish between the number 0 and no value, and to distinguish between explicit "No" and no selection for a Yes/No field. |
| d2:minutesBetween | (datetime, datetime) | Produces the number of minutes between two data elements/attributes of type "date and time". When the first argument datetime comes before the second argument datetime, the number will be positive - in the opposite case, the number will be negative. The static datetime format is 'yyyy-MM-dd hh:mm'. Any of the arguments can be replaced with PS_EVENTDATE:(programStageUid) to compare the latest event date from a given program stage. |
| d2: dias entre | (date, date) | Produces the number of days between two data elements/attributes of type date. When the first argument date comes before the second argument date, the number will be positive - in the opposite case, the number will be negative. The static date format is 'yyyy-MM-dd'. Any of the arguments can be replaced with PS_EVENTDATE:(programStageUid) to compare the latest event date from a given program stage. |
| d2: semanas entre | (date, date) | Produces the number of full weeks between two data elements/attributes of type date. When the first argument date comes before the second argument date, the number will be positive - in the opposite case, the number will be negative. The static date format is 'yyyy-MM-dd'. Any of the arguments can be replaced with PS_EVENTDATE:(programStageUid) to compare the latest event date from a given program stage. |
| d2: meses entre | (date, date) | Produces the number of full months between two data elements/attributes of type date. When the first argument date comes before the second argument date, the number will be positive - in the opposite case, the number will be negative. The static date format is 'yyyy-MM-dd'. Any of the arguments can be replaced with PS_EVENTDATE:(programStageUid) to compare the latest event date from a given program stage. |
| d2: anos entre | (date, date) | Produces the number of full years between two data elements/attributes of type date. When the first argument date comes before the second argument date, the number will be positive - in the opposite case, the number will be negative. The static date format is 'yyyy-MM-dd'. Any of the arguments can be replaced with PS_EVENTDATE:(programStageUid) to compare the latest event date from a given program stage. |
| d2:condition | (boolean-expr, true-expr, false-expr) | Evaluates the boolean expression and if true returns the true expression value, if false returns the false expression value. The conditional expression must be quoted. The true-expr and false-expr arguments must follow the rules of any program indicator expression (including functions). |
| d2: zing | (expression) | Returns zero if the expression is negative, otherwise returns the expression value. The expression must follow the rules of any program indicator expression (including functions). |
| d2: oizp | (expression) | Returns one if the expression is zero or positive, otherwise returns zero. The expression must follow the rules of any program indicator expression (including functions). |
| d2: zpvc | (object, [,object ...]) | Retorna o número de valores numéricos zero e positivos entre os argumentos de objeto fornecidos. Pode ser fornecido qualquer número de argumentos. |
| d2:relationshipCount | ([relationshipTypeUid]) | Produces the number of relationships of the given type that is connected to the enrollment or event. When no type is given, all types are counted. |
| d2: contagem | (dataElement) | Useful only for enrollment program indicators. Counts the number of data values that has been collected for the given program stage and data element in the course of the enrollment. The argument data element is supplied with the #{programStage.dataElement} syntax. |
| d2: countIfValue | (dataElement, value) | Useful only for enrollment program indicators. Counts the number of data values that matches the given literal value for the given program stage and data element in the course of the enrollment. The argument data element is supplied with the #{programStage.dataElement} syntax. The value can be a hard coded text or number, for example 'No_anemia' if only the values containing this text should be counted. |
| d2:countIfCondition | (dataElement, condition) | Useful only for enrollment program indicators. Counts the number of data values that matches the given condition criteria for the given program stage and data element in the course of the enrollment. The argument data element is supplied with the #{programStage.dataElement} syntax. The condition is supplied as a expression in single quotes, for example '<10' if only the values less than 10 should be counted. |
| E se | (boolean-expr, true-expr, false-expr) | Evaluates the boolean expression and if true returns the true expression value, if false returns the false expression value. This is identical to the d2:condition function except that the boolean-expr is not quoted. |
| is | (expr1 in expression [, expression ...]) | Returns true if expr1 is equal to any of the following expressions, otherwise false. |
| é nulo | (object) | Returns true if the object value is missing (null), otherwise false. |
| não é nulo | (object) | Returns true if the object value is not missing (not null), otherwise false. |
| firstNonNull | (object [, object ...]) | Returns the value of the first object that is not missing (not null). Can be provided any number of arguments. Any argument may also be a numeric or string literal, which will be returned if all the previous objects have missing values. |
| maior | (expression [, expression ...]) | Returns the greatest (highest) value of the expressions given. Can be provided any number of arguments. Each expression must follow the rules of any program indicator expression (including functions). |
| menos | (expression [, expression ...]) | Returns the least (lowest) value of the expressions given. Can be provided any number of arguments. Each expression must follow the rules of any program indicator expression (including functions). |
| log | (expression [, base ]) | Returns the natural logarithm (base e) of the numeric expression. If an integer is given as a second argument, returns the logarithm using that base. |
| log10 | (expression) | Returns the common logarithm (base 10) of the numeric expression. |

Um filtro que usa a função "hasValue" tem a seguinte aparência:

    d2: hasValue (# {mCXR7u4kNBW.NFkjsNiQ9PH})

Um filtro que usa a função "relationshipCount (relationshipTypeUid)" tem a seguinte aparência:

    d2: relationshipCount ('KLkjshoQ90U')

A filter that uses the "is( x in y, z )" function looks like this:

    is(#{oahc9ooVema} in 'New', 'Relapse')

Uma expressão que usa as funções "zing" e "oizp" tem esta aparência:

    d2: zing (A {GPkGfbmArby}) + d2: oizp (# {mCXR7u4kNBW.NFkjsNiQ9PH}))

Uma expressão que usa a função "daysBetween" tem a seguinte aparência:

    d2: daysBetween (# {mCXR7u4kNBW.k8ja2Aif1Ae}, '2015-06-01')

Uma expressão que usa a função "yearBetween" para comparar o último evento do estágio do programa 'mCXR7u4kNBW' com a data de inscrição se parece com isto:

    d2: dias entre (V {enrollment_date}, PS_EVENTDATE: mCXR7u4kNBW)

Uma expressão que usa a função "condição" tem a seguinte aparência:

    d2: condição ('# {mCXR7u4kNBW.NFkjsNiQ9PH}> 100', 150,50)

Uma expressão que usa a função "countIfValue" para contar apenas o número de vezes que o valor 10 foi coletado tem a seguinte aparência:

    d2: countIfValue (# {mCXR7u4kNBW.NFkjsNiQ9PH}), 10)

Uma expressão que usa a função "zpvc" tem esta aparência:

    d2: zpvc (A {GPkGfbmArby}), # {mCXR7u4kNBW.NFkjsNiQ9PH}), 4, -1)

Uma expressão que usa as funções "if" e "isnull" tem a seguinte aparência:

    if (isNull (A {GPkGfbmArby}), 10,20)

Uma expressão que usa a função "firstNonNull" tem a seguinte aparência:

    firstNonNull (A {GPkGfbmArby}), # {mCXR7u4kNBW.NFkjsNiQ9PH}, 44)

Uma expressão que usa a função "maior" tem esta aparência:

    maior (# {mCXR7u4kNBW.k8ja2Aif1Ae}, # {mCXR7u4kNBW.NFkjsNiQ9PH}, 1)

#### Variáveis para usar em uma expressão ou filtro de indicador de programa { #variables-to-use-in-a-program-indicator-expression-or-filter } 

The program indicator expression and filter support a range of
variables:



Table: Variables to use in a program indicator expression or filter

| Variável | Descrição |
|---|---|
| event_date | The date of when the event or the last event in the enrollment took place. |
| creation_date | A data de quando um evento ou inscrição foi criado no sistema. |
| due_date | A data de vencimento de um evento. |
| sync_date | A data de quando o evento ou inscrição foi sincronizado pela última vez com o aplicativo Android. |
| incidente_data | A data da incidência do evento. |
| enrollment_date | A data de quando a instância da entidade rastreada foi inscrita no programa. |
| enrollment_status | Can be used to include or exclude enrollments in certain statuses.<br> <br>When calculating the haemoglobin improvement/deterioration throughout a pregnancy, it might make sense to only consider completed enrollments. If non-completed enrollments is not filtered out, these will represent half-finished ANC followups, where the final improvement/deterioration is not yet established. |
| current_date | A data atual. |
| valor_contagem | O número de valores não nulos na parte da expressão do evento. |
| zero_pos_value_count | O número de valores numéricos positivos na parte da expressão do evento. |
| event_count | The count of events (useful in combination with filters). Aggregation type for the program indicator must be COUNT. |
| inscrição_conta | The count of enrollments (useful in combination with filters). Aggregation type for the program indicator must be COUNT.  |
| tei_count | The count of tracked entity instances (useful in combination with filters). Aggregation type for the program indicator must be COUNT. |
| org_unit_count | The count of organisation units (useful in combination with filters). Aggregation type for the program indicator must be COUNT. |
| program_stage_name | Can be used in filters for including only certain program stages in a filter for tracker programs. Uses the name of the program stage:<br> `V{program_stage_name} == 'ANC first visit'` |
| program_stage_id | Can be used in filters for including only certain program stages in a filter for tracker programs. Uses the unique identifier of the program stage:<br> `V{program_stage_id} == 'YPSSfbmAtt1'` |
| analytics_period_start | Can be used in filters or expressions for comparing any date to the first date in each reporting period.<br> `d2:daysBetween(#{WZbXY0S00lP.w4ky6EkVahL}, V{analytics_period_start})` |
| analytics_period_end | Pode ser usado em filtros ou expressões para comparar qualquer data com a última data inclusiva em cada período de relatório. |
| event_status | Can be used in filters or expressions for comparing event status.<br> `V{event_status} == 'COMPLETED'` |
| complete_date | Contains completion date of the event. If the event is not yet complete, then "completed_date" contains nothing. |


A filter that uses the "Analytics period end" variable to only include
women who has an LMP that would be in the first
    trimester:

    d2: daysBetween (# {WZbXY0S00lP.w4ky6EkVahL}, V {analytics_period_end}) <= 84

An expression that uses the "value count" variable looks like
    this:

    (# {A03MvHHogjR.a3kGcGDCuk6} + # {A03MvHHogjR.wQLfBvPrXqq}) / V {value_count}

An expression that uses the "event\_date" and "incident\_date" variables
looks like this:

    d2: daysBetween (V {incident_date}, V {event_date})

#### Operadores para usar em um filtro de indicador de programa { #operators-to-use-in-a-program-indicator-filter } 



Table: Operators to use in a program indicator filter

| Operator | Descrição |
|---|---|
| and | Logical AND |
| or | Logical OR |
| == | Equal to |
| != | Not equal to |
| < | Less than |
| <= | Less than or equal to |
| > | Greater than |
| >= | Greater than or equal to |

These operators can be used to form logical expressions which ultimately
evaluate to either true or false. For example you can assert that
multiple data elements must be a specific value, or that specific
attributes must have numerical values less or greater than a constant.

Um filtro que usa atributos e elementos de dados tem a seguinte aparência:

    A {cejWyOfXge6} == 'Feminino' e # {A03MvHHogjR.a3kGcGDCuk6} <= 2

> **Tip**
>
> DHIS2 is using the JEXL library for evaluating expressions which
> supports additional syntax beyond what is covered in this
> documentation. See the reference at the [project home
> page](http://commons.apache.org/proper/commons-jexl/reference/syntax.html)
> to learn how you can create more sophisticated expressions

## Configurar regras de programa { #configure_program_rule } 

### Sobre as regras do programa { #about_program_rules } 

Program rules allows you to create and control dynamic behaviour of the
user interface in the **Tracker Capture** and **Event Capture** apps.
During data entry, the program rules expressions are evaluated each time
the user interface is displayed, and each time a data element is
changed. Most types of actions will take effect immediately when the
user enters values in the **Tracker Capture** and **Event Capture**
apps.



Table: Program rule components

| Program rule component | Descrição |
|---|---|
| Program rule action | Each program rule contains one or multiple actions. These are the behaviours that are triggered in the user interface when the expression is true. Actions will be applied at once if the expression is true, and will be reverted if the expression is no longer true. There are several types of actions and you can have several actions in one program rule. |
| Program rule expression | Each program rule has a single expression that determines whether the program rule actions should be triggered, if the expression evaluates to true. If the expression is true the program rule is in effect and the actions will be executed. If the expression is false, the program rule is no longer in effect and the actions will no longer be applied.<br> <br>You create the expression with standard mathematical operators, custom functions, user-defined static values and program rule variables. The program rule variables represent attribute and data element values which will be evaluated as part of the expression. |
| Program rule variable | Program rule variables lets you include data values and attribute values in program rule expressions. Typically, you'll have to create one or several program rule variables before creating a program rule. This is because program rules expressions usually contain at least one data element or attribute value to be meaningful.<br> <br>The program rule variables are shared between all rules in your program. When you create multiple program rules for the same program, these rules will share the same library of program rule variables. |

In the **Maintenance** app, you manage the following program rule
objects:


| Object type | Available functions |
|---|---|
| Program rule | Create, edit, clone, delete, show details and translate |
| Program rule variable | Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate |

### Fluxo de Trabalho { #workflow_program_rule } 

1.  In the **Maintenance** app, create program rule variable(s) if
    needed.

2.  No aplicativo ** Manutenção **, crie a regra do programa:

    1.  Insira os detalhes da regra do programa.

    2.  Crie a expressão de regra do programa.

    3.  Defina as ações da regra do programa.

3.  In the **Tracker Capture** or **Event Capture** apps, verify that
    the program rule behaves as expected.

### Crie ou edite uma variável de regra de programa { #create_program_rule_variable } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Program** \> **Program rule
    variable**.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  Selecione um ** Programa ** e insira um ** Nome **.

4.  Selecione se deseja ** Usar código para conjunto de opções **.

    This option is only effective when the data element or tracked
    entity attribute is connected to an option set. If you don't select
    this option, the program rule variable will be populated with the
    option set's name. If you select the option, the program rule
    variable will be populated with the option set's code instead.

5.  Selecione um ** Tipo de fonte ** e insira as informações necessárias.

    Depending on the source type, you'll have to select, for example, a
    **Program stage,** **Data element** or **Tracked entity attribute**.

    The source types determine how the program rule variable is
    populated with a value.


    | Source type | Description |
    |---|---|
    | **Data element from the newest event for a program stage** | This source type works the same way as **Data element from the newest event in the current program**, except that it only evaluates values from one program stage.<br>     <br>This source type can be useful in program rules where the same data element is used in several program stages, and a rule needs to evaluate the newest data value from within one specific stage. |
    | **Data element from the newest event in the current program** | This source type is used when a program rule variable needs to reflect the newest known value of a data element, regardless of what event the user currently has open.<br>     <br>This source type is populated slightly differently in **Tracker Capture** and **Event Capture** apps:<br>     <br>**Tracker Capture**: the program rule variable will be populated with the newest data value collected for the given data element within the enrollment.<br>     <br>**Event Capture**: the program rule variable will be populated with the current events data. <br>**NB** Future dates are "newer" than current or past dates. |
    | **Data element in current event** | Program rule variables with this source type will contain the data value from the same event that the user currently has open.<br>     <br>This is the most commonly used source type, especially for skip logic (hide actions) and warning/error rules. |
    | **Data element from previous event** | Program rule variables with this source type will contain the value from a specified data element from a previous event. Only older events is evaluated, not including the event that the user currently has open.<br>     <br>This source type is commonly used when a data element only should be collected once during an enrollment, and should be hidden in subsequent events.<br>     <br>Another use case is making rules for validating input where there is an expected progression from one event to the next - a rule can evaluate whether the previous value is higher/lower and give a warning if an unexpected value is entered. |
    | **Calculated value** | Program rule variable with this source type is not connected directly to any form data - but will be populated as a result of some other program rules **ASSIGN** action.<br>     <br>This variable will be used for making preliminary calculations, having a **ASSIGN** program rule action and assigning a value, this value can be used by other program rules - potentially making the expressions simpler and more maintanable.<br>     <br>These variables will not be persisted and will stay in memory only during the exectution of the set of program rules. Any program rule that assigns a data value to a preliminary calculated value would normally also have a **priority** assigned - to make sure that the preliminary caculation is done before the rule that consumes the calculated value. |
    | **Tracked entity attribute** | Populates the program rule variable with a specified tracked entity attribute for the current enrollment.<br>     <br>Use this is the source type to create program rules that evaluate data values entered during registration.<br>     <br>This source type is also useful when you create program rules that compare data in events to data entered during registration.<br>     <br>This source type is only used for tracker programs (programs with registration). |

6.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Crie ou edite uma regra de programa { #create_program_rule } 

> ** Nota **
>
> Uma regra de programa pertence a exatamente um programa.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Program** \> **Program
    rule**.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  Enter the program rule details. These fields are not shown to the
    end user, they are only meant for the program administrator.

      - **Programa**

      - ** Regra de gatilho apenas para a fase do programa **

        If a program stage is selected, the program rule will only run for the selected program stage,
        as opposed to being run for every program stage in the program.

      - **Nome**

      - **Descrição**

      - **Prioridade**

        Let's say you have 16 program rules in your program. You
        configure the program rules with the following priority
        settings:

          - Prioridade 1 para regra de programa A

          - Prioridade 2 para regras de programa B - K

          - Sem prioridade para regras de programa L - P

        Result: the system runs the program rules in the following
        order:

        1.  Regra do programa A

        2.  Program rules B - K (you can't find out or configure in
            which order the system runs these program rules)

        3.  Regras do programa L - P.

4.  Click **Enter program rule expression** and create the program rule
    expression with the help of variables, functions and operators.

5.  Click **Define program rule actions** and create the actions
    executed when the expression is true.

    1.  Click the add button, select an **Action** and enter the
        required information.

        Depending on the action type, you'll have to perform different
        types of settings. For some action types, you must also enter
        free text or create expressions.


        | Action type | Required settings | Description |
        |---|---|---|
        ||||
        | **Assign value** | **Data element to assign value to**<br>         <br>**Program rule variable to assign value to**<br>         <br>**Expression to evaluate and assign** | Used to help the user calculate and fill out fields in the data entry form. The idea is that the user shouldn’t have to fill in values that the system can calculate, for example BMI.<br>         <br>When a field is assigned a value, the user sees the value but the user can't edit it.<br>         <br>Example from Immunization stock card i Zambia: The data element for vaccine stock outgoing balance is calculated based on the data element for incoming stock balance minus the data elements for consumption and wastage.<br>         <br>Advanced use: configure an 'assign value' to do a part of a calculation and then assign the result of the calculation to a program rule variable. This is the purpose with the "Calculated value" program rule variable. |
        | **Display text** | **Display widget**<br>         <br>**Static text**<br>         <br>**Expression to evaluate and display after static text** | Used to display information that is not an error or a warning, for example feedback to the user. You can also use this action to display important information, for example the patient's allergies, to the user. |
        | **Display key/value pair** | **Display widget**<br>         <br>**Key label**<br>         <br>**Expression to evaluate and display as value** | Used to display information that is not an error or a warning.<br>         <br>Example: calculate number of weeks and days in a pregnancy and display it in the format the clinician is used to see it in. The calculation is based on previous recorded data. |
        | **Error on complete** | **Data element to display error next to**<br>         <br>**Tracked entity attribute to display error next to**<br>         <br>**Static text**<br>         <br>**Expression to evaluate and display after static text** | Used whenever you've cross-consistencies in the form that must be strictly adhered to. This action prevents the user from continuing until the error is resolved.<br>         <br>This action differs from the regular **Show error** since the error is not shown until the user tries to actually complete the form.<br>         <br>If you don't select a data element or a tracked entity attribute to display the error next to, make sure you write a comprehensive error message that helps the user to fix the error. |
        | **Hide field** | **Data element to hide**<br>         <br>**Tracked entity attribute to hide**<br>         <br>**Custom message for blanked field** | Used when you want to hide a field from the user.<br>         <br>**Custom message for blanked field** allows you to define a custom message displayed to the user in case the program rule hides and blanks out the field after the user typed in or selected a value.<br>         <br>If a hide field action hides a field that contains a value, the field will always removed. If no message is defined, a standard message will be displayed to alert the user. |
        | **Hide section** | **Program stage section to hide** | Used when you want to hide a section in a program stage from the user.  |
        | **Prevent adding new events to stage** | **Program stage where users will not be able to add new events** | Used when you do not want users to add any more events to a program stage. Existing events will not be hidden. |
        | **Make field mandatory** | **Data element to make mandatory**<br>         <br>**Tracked entity attribute to make mandatory** | Used when you want to make a data element or tracked entity attribute mandatory so they have to be filled out before the form can be saved. |
        | **Show error** | **Data element to display error next to**<br>         <br>**Tracked entity attribute to display error next to**<br>         <br>**Static text**<br>         <br>**Expression to evaluate and display after static text** | Used whenever there are rules which must strictly be adhered to. The show error action prevents the user from continuing until the error is resolved.<br>         <br>Such a strict validation should only be used when it's certain that the evaluated expression is never true unless the user has made a mistake in data entry.<br>         <br>It's mandatory to define a message that is shown to the user when the expression is true and the action is triggered.<br>         <br>You can select which data element or tracked entity attribute to link the error to. This will help the user to fix the error.<br>         <br>In case several data elements or attributes are involved, select the one that is most likely that the user would need to change. |
        | **Show warning** | **Data element to display warning next to**<br>         <br>**Tracked entity attribute to display warning next to**<br>         <br>**Static text**<br>         <br>**Expression to evaluate and display after static text** | Used to give the user a warning about the entered data, but at the same time to allow the user to save and continue.<br>         <br>You can use warnings to help the user avoid errors in the entered data, while at the same time allow the user to consciously disregard the warnings and save a value that is outside preset expectations.<br>         <br>**Static text** defines the message shown to the user when the expression is true and the action is triggered.<br>         <br>You can select which data element or tracked entity attribute to link the error to. This will help the user to fix the error.<br>         <br>In case several data elements or attributes are involved, select the one that is most likely that the user would need to change. |
        | **Warning on complete** | **Data element to display warning next to**<br>         <br>**Tracked entity attribute to display warning next to**<br>         <br>**Static text**<br>         <br>**Expression to evaluate and display after static text** | Used to give the user a warning if he/she tries to complete inconsistent data, but at the same time to allow the user to continue. The warning is shown in a dialog when the user completes the form.<br>         <br>**Static text** defines the message shown to the user when the expression is true and the action is triggered. This field is mandatory.<br>         <br>You can select which data element or tracked entity attribute to link the error to. This will help the user to fix the error.<br>         <br>If you don't select a data element or a tracked entity attribute to display the error next to, make sure you write a comprehensive error message that helps the user to fix the error. |
        | **Send Message** | **Message template to send** | Send Message triggers a notification based on provided message template. This action will be taken immediately. The message template will be parsed and variables will be substituted with actual values. |
        | **Schedule Message** | **Message template to send**<br>         <br>**Data field which contains expression to evaluate the date which notification should be sent at. If this expression results in any value other than Date, then resultant will be discarded and notification will not get scheduled.** | Schedule Message will schedule notification at date provided by Expression in the data field. Sample expression is given below<br>         d2:addDays( '2018-04-20', '2' )         <br>Message template will be parsed and variables will be substituted with actual values. |
        | **Hide option** | **Data element to hide option for**<br>         <br>**Tracked entity attribute to hide option for**<br>         <br>**Option that should be hidden** | Used to selectively hide a single option for an option set in a given data element/tracked entity attribute.<br>         <br>When combined with **show option group** the **hide option** takes presedence. |
        | **Hide option group** | **Data element to hide option group for**<br>         <br>**Tracked entity attribute to hide option group for**<br>         <br>**Option group that should be hidden** | Used to hide all options in a given option group and data element/tracked entity attribute.<br>         <br>When combined with **show option group** the **hide option group** takes precedence. |
        | **Show option group** | **Data element to show option group for**<br>         <br>**Tracked entity attribute to show option group for**<br>         <br>**Option group that should be shown** | Used to show only options from a given option group in a given data element/tracked entity attribute. To show an option group implicitly hides all options that is not part of the group(s) that is shown. |

    2.  Click **Save**.

    3.  (Optional) Repeat above steps to add more actions.

6.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Exemplo: regras do programa { #program_rule_examples } 

> **Note**
>
> You can view all examples on the demo server:
> <https://play.dhis2.org/dev/dhis-web-maintenance/#/list/programSection/programRule>

This example shows how to configure a program rule which calculate
number of weeks and days in a pregnancy and display the result in the
format the clinician is used to see it in. The calculation is based on
previous recorded
    data.

1.  ![](resources/images/maintenance/pg_rule_ex/keyvaluepair_details.png)

2.  ![](resources/images/maintenance/pg_rule_ex/keyvaluepair_expression.png)

3.  ![](resources/images/maintenance/pg_rule_ex/keyvaluepair_action.png)

    A expressão completa no campo ** Dados **:

        d2: concatenar (d2: semanasEntre (# {lmp}, V {current_date}), '+',
        d2: módulo (d2: daysBetween (# {lmp}, V {current_date}), 7))

![](resources/images/maintenance/pg_rule_ex/keyvaluepair_result.png)

This example shows how to configure a program rule to display text in
the Feedback widget in the **Tracker Capture**
    app.

1.  ![](resources/images/maintenance/pg_rule_ex/displaytext_pgrule_variable.png)

2.  ![](resources/images/maintenance/pg_rule_ex/displaytext_details.png)

3.  ![](resources/images/maintenance/pg_rule_ex/displaytext_expression.png)

4.  ![](resources/images/maintenance/pg_rule_ex/displaytext_action.png)

![](resources/images/maintenance/pg_rule_ex/displaytext_result.png)

This example shows how to configure a program rule to always display
certain data in the Feedback widget in the **Tracker Capture** app. This
is useful when you want to make sure that vital data, for example
medicine allergies, is always
    visible.

1.  ![](resources/images/maintenance/pg_rule_ex/displaytext2_pgrule_variable.png)

2.  ![](resources/images/maintenance/pg_rule_ex/displaytext2_details.png)

3.  ![](resources/images/maintenance/pg_rule_ex/displaytext2_expression.png)

4.  ![](resources/images/maintenance/pg_rule_ex/displaytext2_action.png)

![](resources/images/maintenance/pg_rule_ex/displaytext2_first_pgstage.png)

![](resources/images/maintenance/pg_rule_ex/displaytext2_result.png)

By using a program rule of type "Assign value" you can calculate the
"Gestational age at visit" value and fill it in the data entry form. You
configure the program rule to calculate "Gestational age at visit" based
on either "LMP date" or "Ultrasound estimated due
date".

1.  ![](resources/images/maintenance/pg_rule_ex/assign_details.png)

2.  ![](resources/images/maintenance/pg_rule_ex/assign_expression.png)

3.  ![](resources/images/maintenance/pg_rule_ex/assign_action.png)

![](resources/images/maintenance/pg_rule_ex/assign_result.png)

### Informações de referência: operadores e funções para usar na expressão de regra de programa { #program_rules_operators_functions } 

> **Tip**
>
> You can nest functions within each other and with sub-expressions to
> form more complex conditions. An example that produces the gestational
> age in weeks, based on last menstrual date:
>
>     d2:floor( d2:daysBetween(#{lastMenstrualDate},V{event_date}) / 7 )

> **Tip**
>
> The source type will determine how the d2: function calls will
> evaluate a (sourcefield) parameter.
>
> Example: where \#{hemoglobinCurrent} is set to source type **Data
> element in current event**. The following function call with evaluate
> whether haemoglobin is entered in the current event.
>
>     d2:hasValue( 'hemoglobinCurrent' )
>
> Example: where \#{hemoglobin} is set to source type **Data element
> from the newest event in the current program**. The following function
> call with evaluate whether there exists a value for the haemoglobin in
> any event in the enrollment.
>
>     d2:hasValue( 'hemoglobin' )
>
> Example: where \#{hemoglobinPrevious} is set to source type **Data
> element from previous event** . The following function call with
> evaluate whether there exists a value for the haemoglobin among the
> events preceding the current event.
>
>     d2:hasValue( 'hemoglobinPrevious' )



Table: Possible operators to use in a program rule expression

| Operator | Descrição |
|---|---|
| + | Add numbers together |
| - | Subtract numbers from each other |
| \* | Multiply two numbers |
| / | Divide two numbers |
| % | The modulus of two numbers |
| && | Logical AND. True only when the expression on the left and right side is true. The left and right side can be yes/no, yes only or a sub-expression in parenthesis. |
| &#124;&#124; | Logical OR. True when either the expression on the left or the expression on the right side is true. The left and right side can be yes/no, yes only or a sub-expression in parenthesis. |
| > | Left number greater than right number |
| >= | Left number greater than or equal to right number |
| < | Left number less than right number |
| <= | Left number less than or equal to right number. |
| == | Left side equal to right side. Supports numbers, text, yes/no and yes only. |
| != | Left side not equal to right side. Supports numbers, text, yes/no and yes only. |
| ! | Negates the following value. Can be used for yes/no, yes only or a sub-expression in parenthesis. |
| () | Parenthesis is used to group sub-expressions. |



Table: Custom functions to use in a program rule expression

| Função | Arguments | Descrição |
|---|---|---|
| d2: ceil | (number) | Rounds the input argument **up** to the nearest whole number. <br>Example:<br> `d2:ceil(#{hemoglobinValue})` |
| d2: chão | (number) | Rounds the input argument **down** to the nearest whole number. <br>An example producing the number of weeks the woman is pregnant. Notice that the sub-expression #{gestationalAgeDays}/7 is evaluated before the floor function is executed:<br> `d2:floor(#{gestationalAgeDays}/7)` |
| d2: redondo | (number [, decimals]) | Rounds the input argument to the nearest integer. An optional second argument can be provided to specify a number of decimal places to which the number is to be rounded. <br>Example: d2:round(1.25, 1) = 1.3 |
| d2: módulo | (number,number) | Produces the modulus when dividing the first with the second argument. <br>An example producing the number of days the woman is into her current pregnancy week:<br> `d2:modulus(#{gestationalAgeDays},7)` |
| d2: zing | (number) | Avalia o argumento do tipo número para zero se o valor for negativo, caso contrário, para o próprio valor. |
| d2: oizp | (number) | Avalia o argumento do tipo número como um se o valor for zero ou positivo, caso contrário, como zero. |
| d2: concatenar | (object, [,object, object,...]) | Produces a string concatenated string from the input parameters. Supports any number of parameters. Will mainly be in use in future action types, for example to display gestational age with d2:concatenate('weeks','+','gestationalageDays'). |
| d2: dias entre | (date, date) | Produces the number of days between the first and second argument. When the first argument date comes before the second argument date, the number will be positive - in the opposite case, the number will be negative. The static date format is 'yyyy-MM-dd'. <br>Example, calculating the gestational age(in days) of a woman, based on the last menstrual period and the current event date:<br> `d2:daysBetween(#{lastMenstrualDate},V{event_date})` |
| d2: semanas entre | (date, date) | Produces the number of full weeks between the first and second argument. When the first argument date comes before the second argument date, the number will be positive - in the opposite case, the number will be negative. The static date format is 'yyyy-MM-dd'. |
| d2: meses entre | (date, date) | Produces the number of full months between the first and second argument. When the first argument date comes before the second argument date, the number will be positive - in the opposite case, the number will be negative. The static date format is 'yyyy-MM-dd'. |
| d2: anos entre | (date, date) | Produces the number of years between the first and second argument. When the first argument date comes before the second argument date, the number will be positive - in the opposite case, the number will be negative. The static date format is 'yyyy-MM-dd'. |
| d2: addDays | (date, number) | Produces a date based on the first argument date, adding the second argument number of days. <br>An example calculating the pregnancy due date based on the last menstrual period:<br> `d2:addDays(#{lastMenstrualDate},'283')` |
| d2: contagem | (sourcefield) | Counts the number of values that is entered for the source field in the argument. The source field parameter is the name of one of the defined source fields in the program - see example <br>Example usage where #{previousPregnancyOutcome} is one of the source fields in a repeatable program stage "previous pregnancy":<br> `d2:count('previousPregnancyOutcome')` |
| d2: countIfValue | (sourcefield,text) | Counts the number of matching values that is entered for the source field in the first argument. Only occurrences that matches the second argument is counted. The source field parameter is the name of one of the defined source fields in the program - see example. <br>Example usage where #{previousPregnancyOutcome} is one of the source fields in a repeatable program stage "previous pregnancy". The following function will produce the number of previous pregnancies that ended with abortion:<br> `d2:countIfValue('previousPregnancyOutcome','Abortion')` |
| d2: countIfZeroPos | (sourcefield) | Counts the number of values that is zero or positive entered for the source field in the argument. The source field parameter is the name of one of the defined source fields in the program - see example. <br>Example usage where #{fundalHeightDiscrepancy} is one of the source fields in program, and it can be either positive or negative. The following function will produce the number of positive occurrences:<br> `d2:countIfZeroPos('fundalHeightDiscrepancy')` |
| d2: hasValue | (sourcefield) | Evaluates to true of the argument source field contains a value, false if no value is entered. <br>Example usage, to find if the source field #{currentPregnancyOutcome} is yet filled in:<br> `d2:hasValue('currentPregnancyOutcome')` |
| d2: zpvc | (object, [,object, object,...]) | Retorna o número de valores numéricos zero e positivos entre os argumentos de objeto fornecidos. Pode ser fornecido com qualquer número de argumentos. |
| d2: validatePattern | (text, regex-pattern) | Evaluates to true if the input text is an exact match with the supplied regular expression pattern. The regular expression needs to be escaped. <br>Example expression, triggering actions if a number is not on the pattern 9999/99/9:<br> `!d2:validatePattern(A{nrc},'\\d{6}\/\\d{2}\/\\d')` <br>Example expression, triggering actions that if the address is not consisting of letters or white spaces, then a white space, then a number:<br> `!d2:validatePattern(A{registrationAddress},'[\\w ]+ \\d+')` <br>Example, triggering actions if a name contains any numbers:<br> `!d2:validatePattern(A{name},'[^\\d]*')` <br>Example expression, triggering actions if a mobile number contains the illegal number sequence 555:<br> `d2:validatePattern(A{mobile} ,'.*555.*')` |
| d2: esquerda | (text, num-chars) | Evaluates to the left part of a text, num-chars from the first character. <br>The text can be quoted or evaluated from a variable:<br> `d2:left(#{variableWithText}, 3)` |
| d2: certo | (text, num-chars) | Evaluates to the right part of a text, num-chars from the last character. <br>The text can be quoted or evaluated from a variable:<br> `d2:right(#{variableWithText}, 2)` |
| d2: substring | (text, start-char-num, end-char-num) | Evaluates to the part of a string specified by the start and end character number. <br>Example expression:<br> `d2:substring(#{variableWithText}, 1, 3)` If the #{variableWithText} in the above example was 'ABCD', then the result of the evaluation would be 'BC' |
| d2: dividir | (text, delimiter, element-num) | Split the text by delimiter, and keep the nth element(0 is the first). <br>The text can be quoted or evaluated from a variable, the delimiter must be quoted:<br> `d2:split(#{variableWithText}, '-', 1)` <br>Note: comma delimiter(,) is not supported. |
| d2: comprimento | (text) | Find the length of a string. <br>Example:<br> `d2:length(#{variableWithText})` |
| d2:inOrgUnitGroup | (text) | Evaluates whether the current organisation unit is in the argument group. The argument can be defined with either ID or organisation unit group code. The current organisation unit will be the event organisation unit when the rules is triggered in the context of an event, and the enrolling organisation unit when the rules is triggered in the event of a TEI registration form. <br>Example expression:<br> `d2:inOrgUnitGroup('HIGH_RISK_FACILITY')` |
| d2:hasUserRole | (user role) | Returns true if current user has this role otherwise false <br>Example expression:<br> d2:hasUserRole('UYXOT4A3ASA') |
| d2:zScoreWFA | Z-Score weight for age indicator | Calculates z-score based on data provided by WHO weight-for-age indicator. e varies between -3.5 to 3.5 depending upon the value of weight. <br>Example expression:<br> `d2:zScoreWFA( ageInMonths, weight, gender )`  <br> **Gender** > Gender is considered female by default. Any of the following codes can > be used to denote male: 'Male', 'MALE', 'male', 'ma', 'm', 'M', 0, false |
| d2:zScoreHFA | Z-Score height for age indicator | Calculates z-score based on data provided by WHO height-for-age indicator. Its value varies between -3.5 to 3.5 depending upon the value of height. <br>Example expression:<br> `d2:zScoreHFA( ageInMonths, height, gender )` |
| d2:zScoreWFH | Z-Score weight for height indicator | Calculates z-score based on data derived from the WHO weight-for-length and weight-for-height indicators. The data used for girls can be found [here](https://github.com/dhis2/dhis2-docs/blob/master/src/commonmark/en/content/user/resources/txt-files/zScoreWFH-girls-table.txt) and for boys [here](https://github.com/dhis2/dhis2-docs/blob/master/src/commonmark/en/content/user/resources/txt-files/zScoreWFH-boys-table.txt). Its value varies between -3.5 to 3.5 depending upon the value of the weight. <br>Example expression:<br> `d2:zScoreWFH( height, weight, gender )` |
| d2:minValue | Get minimum value for provided item | Function gets minimum value of provided data element across entire enrollment. <br>Example expression:<br> `d2:minValue( 'blood-pressure' )` |
| d2:maxValue | Get maximum value for provided item | Function gets maximum value of provided data element across entire enrollment. <br>Example expression:<br> `d2:maxValue( 'blood-pressure' )` |
| d2:lastEventDate | Get the last event date for entered data | Gets the event date when the underlying data element was entered in the previous event in a program stage |
| d2:extractDataMatrixValue | Get GS1 value based on application identifier |  Given a field value formatted with the gs1 data matrix standard and a string key from the GS1 application identifiers. The function looks and returns the value linked to the provided key. <br>Example expression:<br> `d2:extractDataMatrixValue( 'gtin', A{GS1 Value} )` |


Table: Data matrix codes

| AI    | Data Title | Descrição | Fixed Length |
|----|----|----|----|
|  00   | SSCC                      | SSCC (Serial Shipping Container Code)                                                                                                      | 20           |
|  01   | GTIN                      | Global Trade Item Number                                                                                                                   | 16           |
|  02   | CONTENT                   | GTIN of Trade Items Contained in a logistic unit                                                                                          | 16           |
|  10   | LOT_NUMBER                | Batch or lot number                                                                                                                       | Variável     |
|  11   | PROD_DATE                 | Production date (YYMMDD)                                                                                                                   | 8            |
|  12   | DUE_DATE                  | Due date (YYMMDD)                                                                                                                         | 8            |
|  13   | PACK_DATE                 | Packaging date (YYMMDD)                                                                                                                   | 8            |
|  15   | BEST_BEFORE_DATE          | Best before date (YYMMDD)                                                                                                                  | 8            |
|  16   | SELL_BY                   | Sell by date (YYMMDD)                                                                                                                     | 8            |
|  17   | EXP_DATE                  | Expiration date (YYMMDD)                                                                                                                   | 8            |
|  20   | VARIANT                   | Internal Product variant                                                                                                                  | 4            |
|  21   | SERIAL_NUMBER             | Serial number                                                                                                                             | Variável     |
|  22   | CPV                       | Consumer product variant                                                                                                                   | Variável     |
|  235  | TPX                       | Third Party Controlled, Serialised Extension of Global Trade Item Number (GTIN) (TPX)                                                      | Variável     |
|  240  | ADDITIONAL_ID             | Additional product identification assigned by the manufacturer                                                                             | Variável     |
|  241  | CUSTOMER_PART_NUMBER      | Customer part number                                                                                                                       | Variável     |
|  242  | MTO_VARIANT_NUMBER        | Made-to-Order Variation Number                                                                                                             | Variável     |
|  243  | PCN                       | Packaging component number                                                                                                                 | Variável     |
|  250  | SECONDARY_SERIAL          | Secondary serial number                                                                                                                   | Variável     |
|  251  | REF_TO_SOURCE             | Reference to source entity                                                                                                                | Variável     |
|  253  | GDTI                      | Global Document Type Identifier                                                                                                           | Variável     |
|  254  | GLN_EXTENSION_COMPONENT   | GLN Extension component                                                                                                                    | Variável     |
|  255  | GCN                       | Global Coupon Number (GCN)                                                                                                                 | Variável     |
|  30   | VAR_COUNT                 | Variable count                                                                                                                            | Variável     |
|  310* | NET_WEIGHT_KG             | Net weight, kilograms (variable measure trade item                                                                                         | Variável     |
|  311* | LENGTH_M                  | Length or first dimension, metres (variable measure trade item)                                                                            | Variável     |
|  312* | WIDTH_M                   | Width, diameter, or second dimension, metres (variable measure trade item)                                                                 | Variável     |
|  313* | HEIGHT_M                  | Depth, thickness, height, or third dimension, metres (variable measure trade item)                                                        | Variável     |
|  314* | AREA_M2                   | Area, square metres (variable measure  trade item)                                                                                         | Variável     |
|  315* | NET_VOLUME_L              | Net volume, litres (variable measure trade item)                                                                                           | Variável     |
|  316* | NET_VOLUME_M3             | Net volume, cubic metres (variable measure trade item)                                                                                     | Variável     |
|  320* | NET_WEIGHT_LB             | Net weight, pounds (variable measure trade item)                                                                                           | Variável     |
|  321* | LENGTH_I                  | Length or first dimension, inches (variable measure trade item)                                                                            | Variável     |
|  322* | LENGTH_F                  | Length or first dimension, feet (variable measure trade item)                                                                              | Variável     |
|  323* | LENGTH_Y                  | Length or first dimension, yards (variable measure trade item)                                                                             | Variável     |
|  324* | WIDTH_I                   | Width, diameter, or second dimension, inches (variable measure trade item)                                                                 | Variável     |
|  325* | WIDTH_F                   | Width, diameter, or second dimension, feet (variable measure trade item)                                                                   | Variável     |
|  326* | WIDTH_Y                   | Width, diameter, or second dimension, yards(variable measure trade item)                                                                   | Variável     |
|  327* | HEIGHT_I                  | Depth, thickness, height, or third dimension, inches (variable measure trade item)                                                         | Variável     |
|  328* | HEIGHT_F                  | Depth, thickness, height, or third dimension, feet (variable measure trade item)                                                           | Variável     |
|  329* | HEIGHT_Y                  | Depth, thickness, height, or third dimension, yards (variable measure trade item)                                                          | Variável     |
|  330* | GROSS_WEIGHT_GF           | Logistic weight, kilograms                                                                                                                 | Variável     |
|  331* | LENGTH_M_LOG              | Length or first dimension, metres                                                                                                          | Variável     |
|  332* | WIDTH_M_LOG               | Width, diameter, or second dimension, metres                                                                                               | Variável     |
|  333* | HEIGHT_M_LOG              | Depth, thickness, height, or third dimension, metres                                                                                       | Variável     |
|  334* | AREA_M2_LOG               | Area, square metres                                                                                                                       | Variável     |
|  335* | VOLUME_L_LOG              | Logistic volume, litres                                                                                                                    | Variável     |
|  336* | VOLUME_M3_LOG             | Logistic volume, cubic metres                                                                                                              | Variável     |
|  337* | KG_PER_M2                 | Kilograms per square metre                                                                                                                | Variável     |
|  340* | GROSS_WHEIGHT_LB          | Logistic weight, pounds                                                                                                                    | Variável     |
|  341* | LENGTH_I_LOG              | Length or first dimension, inches                                                                                                          | Variável     |
|  342* | LENGTH_F_LOG              | Length or first dimension, feet                                                                                                            | Variável     |
|  343* | LENGTH_Y_LOG              | Length or first dimension, yards                                                                                                           | Variável     |
|  344* | WIDTH_I_LOG               | Width, diameter, or second dimension, inches                                                                                               | Variável     |
|  345* | WIDTH_F_LOG               | Width, diameter, or second dimension, feet                                                                                                 | Variável     |
|  346* | WIDTH_Y_LOG               | Width, diameter, or second dimension, yards                                                                                               | Variável     |
|  347* | HEIGHT_I_LOG              | Depth, thickness, height, or third dimension, inches                                                                                       | Variável     |
|  348* | HEIGHT_F_LOG              | Depth, thickness, height, or third dimension, feet                                                                                         | Variável     |
|  349* | HEIGHT_Y_LOG              | Depth, thickness, height, or third dimension, yards                                                                                        | Variável     |
|  350* | AREA_I2                   | Area, square inches (variable measure trade item)                                                                                          | Variável     |
|  351* | AREA_F2                   | Area, square feet (variable measure trade item)                                                                                            | Variável     |
|  352* | AREA_Y2                   | Area, square yards (variable measure trade item)                                                                                          | Variável     |
|  353* | AREA_I2_LOG               | Area, square inches                                                                                                                        | Variável     |
|  354* | AREA_F2_LOG               | Area, square feet                                                                                                                          | Variável     |
|  355* | AREA_Y2_LOG               | Area, square yards                                                                                                                         | Variável     |
|  356* | NET_WEIGHT_T              | Net weight, troy ounces (variable measure trade item)                                                                                      | Variável     |
|  357* | NET_VOLUME_OZ             | Net weight (or volume), ounces (variable measure trade item)                                                                               | Variável     |
|  360* | NET_VOLUME_Q              | Net volume, quarts (variable measure trade item)                                                                                           | Variável     |
|  361* | NET_VOLUME_G              | Net volume, gallons U.S. (variable measure trade item)                                                                                     | Variável     |
|  362* | VOLUME_Q_LOG              | Logistic volume, quarts                                                                                                                    | Variável     |
|  363* | VOLUME_G_LOG              | Logistic volume, gallons U.S.                                                                                                              | Variável     |
|  364* | VOLUME_I3                 | Net volume, cubic inches (variable measure trade item)                                                                                     | Variável     |
|  365* | VOLUME_F3                 | Net volume, cubic feet (variable measure trade item)                                                                                       | Variável     |
|  366* | VOLUME_Y3                 | Net volume, cubic yards (variable measure trade item)                                                                                      | Variável     |
|  367* | VOLUME_I3_LOG             | Logistic volume, cubic inches                                                                                                               | Variável     |
|  368* | VOLUME_F3_LOG             | Logistic volume, cubic feet                                                                                                                 | Variável     |
|  369* | VOLUME_Y3_LOG             | Logistic volume, cubic yards                                                                                                                | Variável     |
|  37   | COUNT                     | Count of trade items or trade item pieces contained in a logistic unit                                                                     | Variável     |
|  390* | AMOUNT                    | Applicable amount payable or Coupon value, local currency                                                                                  | Variável     |
|  391* | AMOUNT_ISO                | Applicable amount payable with ISO currency code                                                                                           | Variável     |
|  392* | PRICE                     | Applicable amount payable, single monetary area (variable measure trade item)                                                              | Variável     |
|  393* | PRICE_ISO                 | Applicable amount payable with ISO currency code (variable measure trade item)                                                             | Variável     |
|  394* | PRCNT_OFF                 | Percentage discount of a coupon                                                                                                            | Variável     |
|  395* | PRICE_UOM                 | Amount Payable per unit of measure single monetary area (variable measure trade item)                                                      | N4+N6        | Variável     |
|  400  | ORDER_NUMBER              | Customers purchase order number                                                                                                            | Variável     |
|  401  | GINC                      | Global Identification Number for Consignment (GINC)                                                                                        | Variável     |
|  403  | ROUTE                     | Routing code                                                                                                                               | Variável     |
|  410  | SHIP_TO_GLOB_LOC          | Ship to / Deliver to Global Location Number (GLN)                                                                                          | Variável     |
|  411  | BILL_TO_LOC               | Bill to / Invoice to Global Location Number (GLN)                                                                                          | Variável     |
|  412  | PURCHASED_FROM            | Purchased from Global Location Number (GLN)                                                                                                | Variável     |
|  413  | SHIP_FOR_LOG              | Ship for / Deliver for - Forward to Global Location Number (GLN)                                                                           | Variável     |
|  414  | LOC_NUMBER                | Identification of a physical location - Global Location Number (GLN)                                                                       | Variável     |
|  415  | PAY_TO                    | Global Location Number (GLN) of the invoicing party                                                                                        | Variável     |
|  416  | PROD_SERV_LOC             | Global Location Number (GLN) of the production or service location                                                                         | Variável     |
|  417  | PARTY                     | Party Global Location Number (GLN)                                                                                                         | Variável     |
|  420  | SHIP_TO_POST              | Ship to / Deliver to postal code within a single postal authority                                                                          | Variável     |
|  421  | SHIP_TO_POST_ISO          | Ship to / Deliver to postal code with ISO country code                                                                                     | Variável     |
|  422  | ORIGIN                    | Country of origin of a trade item                                                                                                          | Variável     |
|  423  | COUNTRY_INITIAL_PROCESS   | Country of initial processing                                                                                                              | Variável     |
|  424  | COUNTRY_PROCESS           | Country of processing                                                                                                                      | Variável     |
|  425  | COUNTRY_DISASSEMBLY       | Country of disassembly                                                                                                                     | Variável     |
|  426  | COUNTRY_FULL_PROCESS      | Country covering full process chain                                                                                                        | Variável     |
|  427  | ORIGIN_SUBDIVISION        | Country subdivision Of origin                                                                                                              | Variável     |
|  4300 | SHIP_TO_COMP              | Ship-to / Deliver-to company name                                                                                                          | Variável     |
|  4301 | SHIP_TO_NAME              | Ship-to / Deliver-to contact                                                                                                               | Variável     |
|  4302 | SHIP_TO_ADD1              | Ship-to / Deliver-to address line 1                                                                                                        | Variável     |
|  4303 | SHIP_TO_ADD2              | Ship-to / Deliver-to address line 2                                                                                                        | Variável     |
|  4304 | SHIP_TO_SUB               | Ship-to / Deliver-to suburb                                                                                                                 | Variável     |
|  4305 | SHIP_TO_LOCALITY          | Ship-to / Deliver-to locality                                                                                                               | Variável     |
|  4306 | SHIP_TO_REG               | Ship-to / Deliver-to region                                                                                                                 | Variável     |
|  4307 | SHIP_TO_COUNTRY           | Ship-to / Deliver-to country code                                                                                                          | Variável     |
|  4308 | SHIP_TO_PHONE             | Ship-to / Deliver-to telephone number                                                                                                      | Variável     |
|  4310 | RTN_TO_COMP               | Return-to company name                                                                                                                     | Variável     |
|  4311 | RTN_TO_NAME               | Return-to contact                                                                                                                          | Variável     |
|  4312 | RTN_TO_ADD1               | Return-to address line 1                                                                                                                   | Variável     |
|  4313 | RTN_TO_ADD2               | Return-to address line 2                                                                                                                   | Variável     |
|  4314 | RTN_TO_SUB                | Return-to suburb                                                                                                                           | Variável     |
|  4315 | RTN_TO_LOCALITY           | Return-to locality                                                                                                                         | Variável     |
|  4316 | RTN_TO_REG                | Return-to region                                                                                                                           | Variável     |
|  4317 | RTN_TO_COUNTRY            | Return-to country code                                                                                                                     | Variável     |
|  4318 | RTN_TO_POST               | Return-to postal code                                                                                                                      | Variável     |
|  4319 | RTN_TO_PHONE              | Return-to telephone number                                                                                                                 | Variável     |
|  4320 | SRV_DESCRIPTION           | Service code description                                                                                                                   | Variável     |
|  4321 | DANGEROUS_GOODS           | Dangerous goods flag                                                                                                                      | Variável     |
|  4322 | AUTH_LEAV                 | Authority to leave                                                                                                                         | Variável     |
|  4323 | SIG_REQUIRED              | Signature required flag                                                                                                                    | Variável     |
|  4324 | NBEF_DEL_DT               | Not before delivery date time                                                                                                              | Variável     |
|  4325 | NAFT_DEL_DT               | Not after delivery date time                                                                                                               | Variável     |
|  4326 | REL_DATE                  | Release date                                                                                                                               | Variável     |
|  7001 | NSN                       | NATO Stock Number (NSN)                                                                                                                   | Variável     |
|  7002 | MEAT_CUT                  | UN/ECE meat carcasses and cuts classification                                                                                              | Variável     |
|  7003 | EXP_TIME                  | Expiration date and time                                                                                                                   | Variável     |
|  7004 | ACTIVE_POTENCY            | Active potency                                                                                                                             | Variável     |
|  7005 | CATCH_AREA                | Catch area                                                                                                                                 | Variável     |
|  7006 | FIRST_FREEZE_DATE         | First freeze date                                                                                                                          | Variável     |
|  7007 | HARVEST_DATE              | Harvest date                                                                                                                               | Variável     |
|  7008 | AQUATIC_SPECIES           | Species for fishery purposes                                                                                                               | Variável     |
|  7009 | FISHING_GEAR_TYPE         | Fishing gear type                                                                                                                          | Variável     |
|  7010 | PROD_METHID               | Production method                                                                                                                          | Variável     |
|  7020 | REFURB_LOT                | Refurbishment lot ID                                                                                                                       | Variável     |
|  7021 | FUNC_STAT                 | Functional status                                                                                                                          | Variável     |
|  7022 | REV_STAT                  | Revision status                                                                                                                            | Variável     |
|  7023 | GIAI_ASSEMBLY             | Global Individual Asset Identifier (GIAI) of an assembly                                                                                   | Variável     |
|  703* | PROCESSOR_NUMBER          | Number of processor with ISO Country Code                                                                                                  | Variável     |
|  7040 | UIC_EXT                   | GS1 UIC with Extension 1 and Importer index                                                                                                | Variável     |
|  710  | NHRN_PZN                  | National Healthcare Reimbursement Number (NHRN) - Germany PZN                                                                              | Variável     |
|  711  | NHRN_CIP                  | National Healthcare Reimbursement Number (NHRN) - France CIP                                                                               | Variável     |
|  712  | NHRN_CN                   | National Healthcare Reimbursement Number (NHRN) - Spain CN                                                                                 | Variável     |
|  713  | NHRN_DRN                  | National Healthcare Reimbursement Number (NHRN) - Brasil DRN                                                                               | Variável     |
|  714  | NHRN_AIM                  | National Healthcare Reimbursement Number (NHRN) - Portugal AIM                                                                             | Variável     |
|  723* | CERT_NUMBER               | Certification reference                                                                                                                    | Variável     |
|  7240 | PROTOCOL                  | Protocol ID                                                                                                                                | Variável     |
|  8001 | DIMENSIONS                | Roll products (width, length, core diameter, direction, splices)                                                                           | Variável     |
|  8002 | CMT_NUMBER                | Cellular mobile telephone identifier                                                                                                       | Variável     |
|  8003 | GRAI                      | Global Returnable Asset Identifier (GRAI)                                                                                                  | Variável     |
|  8004 | GIAI                      | Global Individual Asset Identifier (GIAI)                                                                                                  | Variável     |
|  8005 | PRICE_PER_UNIT            | Price per unit of measure                                                                                                                  | Variável     |
|  8006 | ITIP                      | Identification of an individual trade item piece (ITIP)                                                                                    | Variável     |
|  8007 | IBAN                      | International Bank Account Number (IBAN)                                                                                                   | Variável     |
|  8008 | PROD_TIME                 | Date and time of production                                                                                                                | Variável     |
|  8009 | OPTSEN                    | Optically Readable Sensor Indicator                                                                                                        | Variável     |
|  8010 | CPID                      | Component/Part Identifier (CPID)                                                                                                           | Variável     |
|  8011 | CPID_SERIAL               | Component/Part Identifier serial number (CPID SERIAL)                                                                                      | Variável     |
|  8012 | VERSION                   | Software version                                                                                                                           | Variável     |
|  8013 | GMN                       | Global Model Number (GMN)                                                                                                                  | Variável     |
|  8017 | GSRN_PROVIDER             | Global Service Relation Number (GSRN) to identify the relationship between an organisation offering services and the provider of services  | Variável     |
|  8018 | GSRN_RECIPIENT            | Global Service Relation Number (GSRN) to identify the relationship between an organisation offering services and the recipient of services | Variável     |
|  8019 | SRIN                      | Service Relation Instance Number (SRIN)                                                                                                    | Variável     |
|  8020 | REF_NUMBER                | Payment slip reference number                                                                                                              | Variável     |
|  8026 | ITIP_CONTENT              | Identification of pieces of a trade item (ITIP) contained in a logistic unit                                                               | Variável     |
|  8110 | COUPON_USA                | Coupon code identification for use in North America                                                                                        | Variável     |
|  8111 | POINTS                    | Loyalty points of a coupon                                                                                                                 | Variável     |
|  8121 | POSITIVE_OFFER_COUPON_USA | Paperless coupon code identification for use in North America                                                                              | Variável     |
|  8200 | PRODUCT_URL               | Extended Packaging URL                                                                                                                     | Variável     |
|  90   | AGREEMENT_INTERNAL        | Information mutually agreed between trading partners                                                                                       | Variável     |
|  91   | COMPANY_INTERNAL_1        | Company internal information                                                                                                              | Variável     |
|  92   | COMPANY_INTERNAL_2        | Company internal information                                                                                                              | Variável     |
|  93   | COMPANY_INTERNAL_3        | Company internal information                                                                                                              | Variável     |
|  94   | COMPANY_INTERNAL_4        | Company internal information                                                                                                              | Variável     |
|  95   | COMPANY_INTERNAL_5        | Company internal information                                                                                                              | Variável     |
|  96   | COMPANY_INTERNAL_6        | Company internal information                                                                                                              | Variável     |
|  97   | COMPANY_INTERNAL_7        | Company internal information                                                                                                              | Variável     |
|  98   | COMPANY_INTERNAL_8        | Company internal information                                                                                                              | Variável     |
|  99   | COMPANY_INTERNAL_9        | Company internal information                                                                                                              | Variável     |

Table: Standard variables to use in program rule expressions

| Variável | Modelo | Descrição |
|---|---|---|
| V{current_date} | (date) | Contains the current date whenever the rule is executed. <br>Example expression:<br> `d2:daysBetween(#{symptomDate},V{current_date}) < 0 `|
| V{event_date} | (date) | Contém a data do evento da execução do evento atual. Não terá valor no momento em que a regra for executada como parte do formulário de inscrição. |
| V{event_status} | (string) | Contains status of the current event or enrollment. <br>Example expression to check status is:<br> `V{event_status} == 'COMPLETED'` |
| V{due_date} | (date) | Esta variável conterá a data atual quando a regra é executada. Observação: isso significa que a regra pode produzir resultados diferentes em momentos diferentes, mesmo que nada mais tenha mudado. |
| V{event_count} | (number) | Contém o número total de eventos na inscrição. |
| V{enrollment_date} | (date) | Contém a data de inscrição da inscrição atual. Não terá valor para programas de eventos únicos. |
| V{incident_date} | (date) | Contém a data do incidente da inscrição atual. Não terá valor para programas de eventos únicos. |
| V{enrollment_id} | (string) | Universial identifier string(UID) of the current enrollment. Will not have a value for single event programs. |
| V{event_id} | (string) | Universial identifier string(UID) of the current event context. Will not have a value at the moment the rule is executed as part of the registration form. |
| V{orgunit_code} | (string) | Contains the code of the orgunit that is linked to the current enrollment. For single event programs the code from the current event orgunit will be used instead. <br>Example expression to check whether orgunit code starts with WB_:<br> `d2:left(V{orgunit_code},3) == 'WB_'` |
| V{environment} | (string) | Contém um código que representa o ambiente de tempo de execução atual para as regras. Os valores possíveis são "WebClient", "AndroidClient" e "Server". Pode ser usado quando uma regra de programa deve ser executada apenas em um ou mais tipos de cliente. |
| V{program_stage_id} | (string) | Contém o ID do estágio atual do programa que acionou as regras. Isso pode ser usado para executar regras em estágios específicos do programa ou evitar a execução em certos estágios. Ao executar as regras no contexto de um formulário de registro TEI, a variável estará vazia. |
| V{program_stage_name} | (string) | Contém o nome do estágio atual do programa que acionou as regras. Isso pode ser usado para executar regras em estágios específicos do programa ou evitar a execução em certos estágios. Ao executar as regras no contexto de um formulário de registro TEI, a variável estará vazia. |
| V{completed_date} | (string) | This variable contains completion date of event which triggered this rule. If event is not yet complete then "completed_date" contains nothing. |

## Configurar tipos de relacionamento { #configure_relationship_type } 

### Sobre tipos de relacionamento { #about_relationship_types } 

Um relacionamento representa um link entre duas entidades no modelo Tracker. Um relacionamento é considerado dado no DHIS2 e é baseado em um Tipo de Relacionamento, semelhante a como uma Instância de Entidade Rastreada é baseada em um Tipo de Entidade Rastreada.

Os relacionamentos sempre incluem duas entidades, e essas entidades podem incluir Instâncias de entidades rastreadas, inscrições e eventos, e qualquer combinação deles. Observe que nem todas essas combinações estão disponíveis nos aplicativos atuais.

Além disso, os relacionamentos podem ser definidos como unidirecionais ou bidirecionais. A única diferença funcional atualmente é que eles requerem diferentes níveis de acesso para criar. Os relacionamentos unidirecionais requerem que o usuário tenha acesso de gravação de dados para a entidade “de” e acesso de leitura de dados para a entidade “para”, enquanto os relacionamentos bidirecionais requerem acesso de gravação de dados para ambos os lados.

For more information about configuration and the meaning of 'From constraint' and 'To constraint', see [Relationship model](#relationship_model_relationship_type).

### Criar ou editar um tipo de relacionamento { #create_relationship_type } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Program** \> **Relationship
    type**.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  Digite um ** Nome ** do tipo de relacionamento.

4.  (Opcional) Atribua um ** Código **.

5.  (Opcional) Forneça uma ** Descrição ** do relacionamento.

6. (Opcional) Selecione se o relacionamento deve ser bidirecional

7. Forneça ** Nome do relacionamento visto da entidade inicial **. Este é o nome do relacionamento que será mostrado no aplicativo Data Entry no lado 'esquerdo' do relacionamento. Por exemplo. em um relacionamento mãe-filho, isso poderia ser 'Mãe de'.

8. (Opcional) Forneça ** Nome do relacionamento visto da entidade receptora **. Este é o nome do relacionamento que será mostrado no lado 'direito' do relacionamento no aplicativo de entrada de dados. Por exemplo. em um relacionamento mãe-filho, pode ser 'mãe'.

9.  Select a 'From constraint'. This limits what kind of entities can be included in the relationship. [Relationship model](#relationship_model_relationship_type). After selecting a 'From constraint', you have the option to choose which attributes or data elements should be shown in the relationship widget in Tracker Capture and Capture for the "From constraint". The list will vary based on the constraint:
    * When selecting “Tracked Entity Instance”, then a Tracked Entity Type only, choose between the configured Tracked Entity Type Attributes
    * When selecting “Tracked Entity Instance”, then a Tracked Entity Type and a Program, choose between the the attributes that have been configured for both the Tracked Entity Type and for the Program
    * When selecting “Enrollment in program”, choose between the attributes that have been configured for the Program
    * When selecting “Event in program or program stage”, choose between the data elements that have been configured for that Event program or Program stage

10. Select a 'To constraint'. This limits what kind of entities that can be included in the relationship. [Relationship model](#relationship_model_relationship_type). Repeat the selection of attributes or data elements that should be shown in the relationship widget for the "To constraint".

11. Clique em **Salvar**.

## Configurar tipos de entidades rastreadas { #configure_tracked_entity } 

### Sobre tipos de entidades rastreadas { #about_tracked_entity } 

A tracked entity is a types of entities which can be tracked through the
system. It can be anything from persons to commodities, for example a
medicine or a person.

A program must have one tracked entity. To enroll a tracked entity
instance into a program, the tracked entity type and tracked
entity type of a program must be the same.

Tracked entity attributes are used to register extra information for a
tracked entity. Tracked entity attributes can be shared between
programs.

### Criar ou editar um atributo de entidade rastreada { #create_tracked_entity_attribute } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Program** \> **Tracked
    entity attribute**.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  No campo ** Nome **, digite o nome do atributo da entidade rastreada.

4.  (Opcional) Digite um ** Nome abreviado **.

4.  (Opcional) Digite um ** Nome do formulário **.

5.  (Opcional) No campo ** Código **, atribua um código.

6.  (Opcional) Digite uma ** Descrição **.

7. (Optional) In the **Field mask** field, you may type a template that's used to provide
   hints for correct formatting of the attribute. **NOTE: So far only implemented in the DHIS2 Android Capture app, not in the Capture and Tracker Capture web apps.**
   A seguir estão os caracteres especiais que podem ser usados na máscara. Os caracteres especiais correspondem exatamente a um caractere do tipo fornecido.

   | Personagem | Match |
   | ------------- |----------------|
   | \\ d | dígito |
   | \\ x | letra minúscula |
   | \\ X | letra maiúscula |
   | \\ w | qualquer caractere alfanumérico |

  For example, the pattern can be used to show hyphens as needed in the input field of the data element. E.g "\d\d\d-\d\d\d-\d\d\d, would
  show an hyphen for every third digit.

8.  Selecione um ** Conjunto de opções **.

9.  In the **Value type** field, select the type of data that the
    tracked entity attribute will record.



    Table: Value types

    | Value type | Description |
    |---|---|
    | Age | - |
    | Coordinate | A point coordinate specified as longitude and latitude in decimal degrees. All coordinate should be specified in the format "-19.23 , 56.42" with a comma separating the longitude and latitude. |
    | Date | Dates render as calendar widget in data entry. |
    | Date & time | - |
    | E-mail | - |
    | File | A file resource where you can store external files, for example documents and photos. |
    | Image | Similar to File, but restricted to images. |
    | Integer | Any whole number (positive and negative), including zero. |
    | Letter | - |
    | Long text | Textual value. Renders as text area in forms. |
    | Negative integer | Any whole number less than (but not including) zero. |
    | Number | Any real numeric value with a single decimal point. Thousands separators and scientific notation is not supported. |
    | Percentage | Whole numbers inclusive between 0 and 100. |
    | Phone number ||
    | Positive integer | Any whole number greater than (but not including) zero. |
    | Positive of zero integer | Any positive whole number, including zero. |
    | Organisation unit | - |
    | Unit interval | Any real number greater than or equal to 0 and less than or equal to 1. |
    | Text | Textual value. The maximum number of allowed characters per value is 50,000. |
    | Time | Time is stored in HH:mm format.<br>     <br>HH is a number between 0 and 23<br>     <br>mm is a number between 00 and 59 |
    | Tracker associate | - |
    | Username |  Rendered as a dialog with a list of users and a search field. The user will need the "View User" authority to be able to utilise this data type |
    | Yes/No | Boolean values, renders as drop-down lists in data entry. |
    | Yes only | True values, renders as check-boxes in data entry. |

9.  Selecione um ** Tipo de agregação **.



    Table: Aggregation operators

    | Aggregation operator | Description |
    |---|---|
    | Average | Average the values in both the period as and the organisation unit dimensions. |
    | Average (sum in organisation unit hierarchy) | Average of data values in the period dimension, sum in the organisation unit dimensions. |
    | Count | Count of data values. |
    | Min | Minimum of data values. |
    | Max | Maximum of data values. |
    | None | No aggregation is performed in any dimension. |
    | Sum | Sum of data values in the period and organisation unit dimension. |
    | Standard deviation | Standard deviation (population-based) of data values. |
    | Variance | Variance (population-based) of data values. |

10. Select **Unique** to specify that the values of the tracked entity
    attribute is unique.

    Existem duas opções para a configuração única:

      - **Entire system**: The values of the tracked entity attribute
        can duplicate with values which belong to other tracked entity
        attributes. But the values in this tracked entity attribute must
        not duplicate.

        Select **Automatically generated** to allow automatic generation
        of the tracked entity attribute value. When the generate setting
        is selected on, an optional field for specifying pattern also
        displays. This field should contain a pattern based on the
        TextPattern syntax. When the value is automatically generated,
        it will be unique for this attribute for the entire system. See
        the TextPattern section for more information on how it works.

      - **Organisation unit**: The values of the tracked entity
        attribute must not duplicate in the same organisation unit.

11. Select **Inherit** to registry a new entity for relationship with an
    available entity, all inherit entity attribute values of the entity
    will be pre-filled in the registration form.

12. (Opcional) Selecione ** Confidencial **.

    This option is only available if you have configured encryption for
    the system.

13. (Opcional) Selecione ** Exibir na lista sem programa **.

14. (Opcional) Atribua uma ou várias ** Legendas **.

15. Clique em **Salvar**.

### Criar ou editar um tipo de entidade rastreada { #create_tracked_entity } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Program** \> **Tracked
    entity type**.

2.  Click the add button or an already existing **tracked entity
    type**.

3.  Digite um ** Nome ** da entidade rastreada.

4.  (Optional) select a **Color** and an **Icon** that will be used by
    the data capture apps to identify this tracked entity type.

5.  (Opcional) Insira uma ** Descrição ** da entidade rastreada.

6.  (Optional) Enter a **Minimum number of attributes required to
    search**. This specifies the amount of attributes that need to be
    filled out in order to be able to search for this **tracked entity
    type** in a *global search*. See [Configure
    Search](#configure_search) for more information.

7.  (Optional) Enter a **Maximum number of tracked entity instances to
    return in search**. This specifies the amount of tracked entity
    instances that will be returned in a *global search*. See [Configure
    Search](#configure_search) for more information.

8.  (Optional) Add **Tracked entity type attributes**. This is used to
    configure search, see [Configure
    Search](#configure_search) for more information.

9.  (Opcional) Insira um ** Nome alternativo ** da entidade rastreada.

10. Clique em **Salvar**.

## Configurar pesquisa { #configure_search } 

Users can be given search organisation units, which makes it possible to
search for tracked entity instances outside their data capture
organisation units.

Searching can be done either in the context of a program, or in the
context of a tracked entity type. To be give users the option of
searching in the context of a program, it is necessary to configure
which of the programs tracked entity attributes is searchable. To give
users the option of searching in the context of a tracked entity type,
you will have to configure which of the tracked entity type attributes
is searchable.

### Configure a pesquisa para o programa rastreador { #configure-search-for-tracker-program } 

To be able to search with a program, you will have to make some of the
program attributes searchable. Unique program attributes will always be
searchable.

1.  Open **Maintenance app** and click **Program**

2.  Open or create a Tracker program

3.  Vá para ** Atributos **

4.  Se você não tem atributos, adicione um

5.  Defina o atributo pesquisável

Atributos de programa pesquisáveis serão atribuídos a um grupo de pesquisa.

  - Unique group. One group per unique program attribute. Unique
    attributes cannot be combined with other program attributes in a
    search. The result from the search can only be 0 or 1 tracked entity
    instance.

  - Non-unique group. This group contains all non-unique program
    attributes and makes it possible to combine multiple attributes in a
    search.

There are two limits that can be set for a program search, as part of
the **Program details** configuration.

  - Minimum number of attributes required to search: This property
    defines how many of the non-unique attributes that must be entered
    before a search can be performed.

<!-- end list -->

  - Maximum number of tracked entity instances to return: This property defines how specific a search must be, by limiting the number of matching tracked entity instances a user is allowed to get for her search criteria. If the number of matching records is larger than this maximum, they will not be returned. The user must provide more specific search criteria, in order to reduce the number of matching records, before they are returned.

    > **NOTE**
    >
    > This maximum is only applied to search results outside the users capture org unit. Within the capture scope, the user can see any number of results.

### Configure a pesquisa para o tipo de entidade rastreada { #configure-search-for-tracked-entity-type } 

> ** Nota **
>
> TET = tipo de entidade rastreada

To be able to search without a program, you will have to make some of
the TET attributes searchable. Unique TET attributes will always be
searchable.

1.  Abra o ** aplicativo de tipo de entidade rastreada **

2.  Abra um tipo de entidade rastreada

3.  Se o TET não tiver atributos, adicione um

4.  Defina o atributo pesquisável

Atributos TET pesquisáveis serão atribuídos a um grupo de pesquisa.

  - Unique group. One group per unique TET attribute. Unique attributes
    cannot be combined with other TET attributes in a search. The result
    from the search can only be 0 or 1 tracked entity instance.

  - Non-unique group. This group contains all non-unique TET attributes
    and makes it possible to combine multiple attributes in a search.

Existem dois limites que podem ser definidos para uma pesquisa TET

  - Minimum number of attributes required to search: This property
    defines how many of the non-unique attributes that must be entered
    before a search can be performed.

<!-- end list -->

  - Maximum number of tracked entity types to return: This property defines how specific a search must be, by limiting the number of matching tracked entity types a user is allowed to get for her search criteria. If the number of matching records is larger than this maximum, they will not be returned. The user must provide more specific search criteria, in order to reduce the number of matching records, before they are returned.

    > **NOTE**
    >
    > This maximum is only applied to search results outside the users capture org unit. Within the capture scope, the user can see any number of results.

### Configurar unidades de organização de pesquisa para um usuário { #configure-search-organisation-units-for-a-user } 

To be able to search in other organisation units than the users data
capture organisation units, the user must be assigned with search
organisation units. Giving a user a search organisation unit will also
give it access to search in all children of that organisation unit.

1.  Abra o ** aplicativo Usuários **

2.  Clique em um usuário

3.  Abrir ** Atribuir unidades de organização de pesquisa **

4.  Selecione as unidades de organização

5.  Clique em ** Salvar **

## Clonar objetos de metadados { #clone_metadata } 

Cloning a data element or other objects can save time when you create
many similar objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to clone.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Clonar **.

3.  Modifique as opções que você deseja.

4.  Clique em **Salvar**.

## Excluir objetos de metadados { #delete-metadata-objects } 

> **Note**
>
> You can only delete a data element and other data element objects if
> no data is associated to the data element itself.

> **Warning**
>
> Any data set that you delete from the system is irrevocably lost. All
> data entry forms, and section forms which may have been developed will
> also be removed. Make sure that you have made a backup of your
> database before deleting any data set in case you need to restore it
> at some point in time.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to delete.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Excluir **.

3.  Clique em ** Confirmar **.

## Alterar as configurações de compartilhamento para objetos de metadados { #change-sharing-settings-for-metadata-objects } 

You can assign different sharing settings to metadata objects, for
example organisation units and tracked entity attributes. These sharing
settings control which users and users groups that can view or edit a
metadata object.

Some metadata objects also allows you to change the sharing setting of
data entry for the object. These additional settings control who can
view or enter data in form fields using the metadata.

> **Note**
>
> The default setting is that everyone (**Public access**) can find,
> view and edit metadata objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to modify.

2.  In the object list, click the context menu and select **Sharing
    settings**.

3.  (Optional) Add users or user groups: search for a user or a user
    group and select it. The user or user group is added to the list.

4.  Altere as configurações de compartilhamento dos grupos de acesso que você deseja modificar.

      - **Can edit and view**: The access group can view and edit the
        object.

      - ** Pode visualizar apenas **: O grupo de acesso pode visualizar o objeto.

      - **No access** (only applicable to **Public access**): The public
        won't have access to the object.

5.  Change data sharing settings for the access groups you want to
    modify.

      - **Can capture data**: The access group can view and capture data
        for the object.

      - **Can view data**: The access group can view data for the
        object.

      - **No access**: The access group won't have access to data for
        the object.

6.  Clique em ** Fechar **.

## Exibir detalhes de objetos de metadados { #display-details-of-metadata-objects } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to view.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Show
    details**.

## Traduzir objetos de metadados { #translate-metadata-objects } 

DHIS2 provides functionality for translations of database content, for
example data elements, data element groups, indicators, indicator groups
or organisation units. You can translate these elements to any number of
locales. A locale represents a specific geographical, political, or
cultural region.

> **Tip**
>
> To activate a translation, open the **System Settings** app, click \>
> **Appearance** and select a language.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to translate.

2.  Na lista de objetos, clique no menu de opções e selecione ** Traduzir **.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > If you want to translate an organisation unit level, click
    > directly on the **Translate** icon next to each list item.

3.  Selecione um local.

4.  Digite um ** Nome **, ** Nome curto ** e ** Descrição **.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.



# Gerenciar usuários, funções e grupos de usuários { #manage_user_role_group } 

## Sobre gerenciamento de usuários { #about_user_userrole } 

Multiple users can access DHIS2 simultaneously and each user can have
different authorities. You can fine-tune these authorities so that
certain users can only enter data, while others can only generate
reports.

  - You can create as many users, user roles and user groups as you
    need.

  - You can assign specific authorities to user groups or individual
    users via user roles.

  - Você pode criar várias funções de usuário, cada uma com suas próprias autoridades.

  - You can assign user roles to users to grant the users the
    corresponding authorities.

  - You can assign each user to organisation units. Then the user can
    enter data for the assigned organisation units.

  - You can set an expiration date to individual users

Table: User management terms and definitions

| Term | Definition | Exemplo |
|---|---|---|
| Autoridade | A permission to perform one or several specific tasks | Create a new data element<br> <br>Update an organisation unit<br> <br>View a report |
| Do utilizador | A person's DHIS2 user account | admin<br> <br>traore<br> <br>guest |
| User role | A group of authorities | Data entry clerk<br> <br>System administrator<br> <br>Antenatal care program access |
| User group | A group of users | Kenya staff<br> <br>Feedback message recipients<br> <br>HIV program coordinators |

Você gerencia usuários, funções de usuário e grupos de usuários no aplicativo ** Usuários **.

Table: Objects in the Users app

| Object type | Available functions |
|---|---|
| Do utilizador | Create, edit, invite, clone, disable, display by organisation unit, delete, show details and reset password |
| User role | Create, edit, share, delete and show details |
| User group | Create, edit, join, leave, share, delete and show details |

### Sobre usuários { #about-users } 

Each user in DHIS2 must have a user account which is identified by a
user name. You should register a first and last name for each user as
well as contact information, for example an email address and a phone
number.

It is important that you register the correct contact information. DHIS2
uses this information to contact users directly, for example sending
emails to notify users about important events. You can also use the
contact information to share for example dashboards and pivot tables.

A user in DHIS2 is associated with an organisation unit. You should
assign the organisation unit where the user works.

When you create a user account for a district record officer, you should
assign the district where he/she works as the organisation unit.

A unidade de organização atribuída afeta como o usuário pode usar DHIS2:

  - In the **Data Entry** app, a user can only enter data for the
    organisation unit she is associated with and the organisation units
    below that in the hierarchy. For instance, a district records
    officer will be able to register data for her district and the
    facilities below that district only.

  - In the **Users** app, a user can only create new users for the
    organisation unit she is associated with in addition to the
    organisation units below that in the hierarchy.

  - In the **Reports** app, a user can only view reports for her
    organisation unit and those below. (This is something we consider to
    open up to allow for comparison reports.)

An important part of user management is to control which users are
allowed to create new users with which authorities. In DHIS2, you can
control which users are allowed to perform this task. The key principle
is that a user can only grant authorities and access to data sets that
the user itself has access to. The number of users at national, province
and district level are often relatively few and can be created and
managed by the system administrators. If a large proportion of the
facilities are entering data directly into the system, the number of
users might become unwieldy. It is recommended to delegate and
decentralize this task to the district officers, it will make the
process more efficient and support the facility users better.

### Sobre funções de usuário { #about-user-roles } 

A user role in DHIS2 is a group of authorities. An authority means the
permission to perform one or more specific tasks.

A user role can contain authorities to create a new data element, update
an organisation unit or view a report.

A user can have multiple user roles. If so, the user's authorities will
be the sum of all authorities and data sets in the user roles. This
means that you can mix and match user roles for special purposes instead
of only creating new ones.

A user role is associated with a collection of data sets. This affects
the **Data Entry** app: a user can only enter data for the data sets
registered for his/her user role. This can be useful when, for example,
you want to allow officers from health programs to enter data only for
their relevant data entry forms.

Recomendações:

  - Crie uma função de usuário para cada posição na organização.

  - Create the user roles in parallel with defining which user is doing
    which tasks in the system.

  - Only give the user roles the exact authorities they need to perform
    their job, not more. Only those who are supposed to perform a task
    should have the authorities to perform it.

### Sobre grupos de usuários { #about-user-groups } 

A user group is a group of users. You use user groups when you set up
sharing of metadata objects or notifications for example for reports or programs.

Veja também:

[Sharing](https://ci.dhis2.org/docs/master/en/user/html/sharing.html)

[Manage program
notifications](https://docs.dhis2.org/master/en/user/html/configure_tracker_program_in_Maintenance_app.html#create-a-program-stage-notification)

[Manage push
reports](https://docs.dhis2.org/master/en/user/html/manage_push_report.html)

## Fluxo de Trabalho { #user_mgt_workflow } 

1.  Define the positions you need for your project and identify which
    tasks the different positions will perform.

2.  Crie aproximadamente uma função de usuário para cada posição.

3.  Crie usuários.

4.  Atribuir funções de usuário aos usuários.

5.  Atribua os usuários a unidades de organização.

6.  (Opcional) Agrupe usuários em grupos de usuários.

7.  Share datasets with users or user-groups via the Sharing Dialog in
    Data set management section of the Maintenance app

> **Tip**
>
> For users to be able to enter data, you must add them to an
> organisational unit level and share a dataset with them.

## Gerenciar usuários { #mgt_user } 

### Criar um usuário { #create_user } 


![](resources/images/dhis2UserManual/select_user_menu.png)

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Usuários ** e clique em ** + ** no cartão ** Usuários **.

2.  Select whether you want to fill in all the personal user
    information, or invite the user by email to complete the rest of the
    user information:
 - **Create account with user details**
![](resources/images/dhis2UserManual/user_management_details.png)
Choose this option if you would like to enter all the login details of
the new user such as username, password, etc. Under these conditions, the fields username, password, surname, first
name, and roles are mandatory.<br/><br/>
After you've created the user, the account is ready for the user to use
with the user name and password that you provide.<br/><br/>

    #### Username requirements

    The following rules apply when you create a new username. The username must:

    - Contain at least 4 characters.

    - Not contain more than 255 characters.

    - Contain lowercase and UPPERCASE latin characters and numbers (`a-z`,`A-Z`,`0-9`).

    - These characters are also allowed `. _ @` and `#`, but these may only be used as a separator, and not as a leading or trailing character, and should not be repeated (i.e. `user@@name` is not allowed).

 - **Email invitation to create account**
![](resources/images/dhis2UserManual/user_management_invite.png)
Choose this option if you want to send an invitation by email to the
user. Then she/he must return to DHIS2 and finish setting up their user
account. The account that the user finishes setting up will be limited
according to how you configure the account.

> **Note**
>
> In order to use this feature the system should have a valid email 
> configuration in SystemSettings -\> Email


Enter the email address to which the invitation should be sent. If you
want to, you may also enter the user name that the account will have. If
you leave the user name empty, then the user may choose their own user
name when they respond to the invitation (as long as it is not taken
already for another user.)<br/><br/>

After you've created the user, the system sends an email to the address
you provided. It contains a unique web link by which the user can return
to the system and activate their account by entering the rest of their
user information. The user must finish setting up the account within 4
days, after that the invitation becomes invalid.

3. (Optional) Provide values for the fields **OIDC mapping claim, LDAP identifier, Mobile phone number, WhatsApp, Facebook messenger, Skype, Telegram and Twitter**.

4. Select an **Interface language**.<br/> 
You can select a language into which fixed elements of the DHIS2 user interface have been translated. 

5. Select a **Database language**. <br/>
You can select a language into which implementation-supplied
items have been translated in the database, for example data element
names or organisation unit level names.

6. Na seção ** Funções disponíveis **, clique duas vezes nas funções de usuário que deseja atribuir ao usuário.

7. Select **Data capture and maintenance organisation units**.<br/>
 ![](resources/images/dhis2UserManual/user_management_fewer_options.png)<br/>
    The data capture and maintenance organisation units control for which organisation units the user can do data entry. You must assign at least one data capture and maintenance organisation unit to each user.<br/><br/>
    Users will have access to all sub-organisation units of the assigned
    organisation units. For example, if you've assigned a user to a district
    which has several facilities contained in the district, the user would
    have access to the district's data, as well as all of the facilities
    contained within the district.

8. (Optional) Select **Data output and analysis organisation units**.<br/><br/>
The data output and analysis organisation units controls for 
which organisation units the user can view aggregated data in the 
analytics apps, for example the **Pivot Table** and **GIS** apps. You 
can assign any number of data output and analysis organisation units to 
a user.<br/><br/>
Users will have access to all sub-organisation units of the
assigned organisation units. You shouldn't select the descendants of an
organisation unit which you have already selected. For example, if
you've assigned the user to a district, you shouldn't select the
facilities within that district.<br/><br/>

> **Note**
> 
>Assigning data output and analysis organisation units organisation units is optional. If you don't specify
>any organisation unit, the user will have access to the full
>organisation unit hierarchy for viewing aggregated data. As with the
>data capture organisation units, *you should not select descendant
>organisation units of a unit which you have already selected*.<br/><br/>
>In several places in the analytics apps, you can select "user organisation
>unit" for the organisation unit dimension. This mechanism will first
>attempt to use the data view organisation units linked to the current
>user. If not found, it will use the data capture and maintenance
>organisation units. If the user has been assigned to multiple
>organisation units, the use of "user organisation unit" may result in
>unpredictable behaviour.<br/><br/>

9. Click **Show more options** and an additional
three fields will show. (Optional) <br/><br/>

10. In the **Search organisation units** 
select the organisation units you want the user to be able to search in.<br/><br/>

11. (Optional) In the **Available user groups** section, double-click the
user groups you want to assign to the user.<br/><br/>

12. (Optional) In the **Available dimension restrictions for data analytics** section,
double-click the dimensions you want to assign to the user. <br/><br/>
You can restrict the values the user sees in data analytics apps by selecting
dimensions that will restrict the user's view.

> **Example**
>
> Let's say you have defined *Implementing Partner* as a category option group set, and you have shared with this user only one or more specific implementing partners (category option groups). If you want to make sure that the user does not see totals in analytics that include values from other groups, assign *Implementing Partner* to the user.<br/><br/>
This insures that any data visible to the user through the analytics apps will be filtered to select only the Implementing Partner category option group(s) which are visible to the user.<br/><br/>

13. Clique em ** Salvar **.

### Edit user { #edit_user }

1.  Open the **Users** app and find the user you want to edit.

2.  In the user list, directly click the relevant user, or click the
    menu icon and select **Edit**.

3.  Modifique as opções que você deseja.

4.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Set account expiration date { #user_account_expiration_date }

In case a user account should expire on a specific date, you can set an account
expiration date for a user

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Usuários ** e clique em ** Usuário **.

2.  **Select the user** whose account should have an expiration date

3.  Use the **"Account expiration date" input** to define the date

4.  **Save the updates** by submitting the form

### Disable user { #disable_user }

You can disable a user. This means that the user's account is not
deleted, but the user can't log in or use DHIS2.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Usuários ** e clique em ** Usuário **.

2.  In the list, click the menu icon of relevant user record and select
    **Disable**.

3.  Clique em ** OK ** para confirmar.

> **Warning** 
> 
> If you are using the [Android Capture App](https://www.dhis2.org/android) disabling a user (in DHIS2 versions previous to 2.30 and after 2.38) will cause the Android application to delete the local data stored on the phone next time the user attemps an on-line login. Please make sure that when you use the *disable user* function all the data has been synced with the server. Or that you are using this funcionality to ensure data deletion in case of a device being lost.

### Display user profile { #display_user_profile }

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Usuários ** e clique em ** Usuário **.

2.  In the list, click the menu icon of the relevant user and select
    **Profile**.

### Filtrar usuários por unidade organizacional { #filter-users-by-organisation-unit } 

You can view all users that have been assigned to a particular
organisation unit.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Usuários ** e clique em ** Usuários **.

2.  Above the user list, click on the **Organisation Unit** filter
    input.

3.  A pop-up will appear in which you can select the organisation units
    you would like to filter by.

The list of users will be filtered to only include users which have been
assigned to the selected organisation units.

### Clone user { #clone_user } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Usuários ** e clique em ** Usuário **.

2.  In the user list, click the menu icon of the relevant user and
    select **Replicate**.

3.  Insira um novo nome de usuário e senha para a conta de usuário clonada.

4.  Clique em ** Replicar **.

5.  In the user list, click the user you just created and click
    **Edit**.

6.  Modifique as opções que você deseja.

7.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Alterar senha de usuário { #user_manage_password } 

Para alterar a senha de um usuário:

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Usuários ** e clique em ** Usuário **.

2.  In the user list, click the menu icon of the relevant user and
    select **Edit**.

3.  Insira uma nova senha e digite-a novamente.

4.  Clique em **Salvar**.

#### Requisitos de senha { #password-requirements } 

As regras a seguir se aplicam quando você cria uma nova senha. A senha deve:

  - Contain at least 8 characters. Note that this number is configurable through the system setting "Minimum characters in password", which can be up to 14 characters. 

  - Not contain more than 34 characters.

  - Conter pelo menos um caractere especial (caractere não alfanumérico).

  - Contain at least one UPPERCASE character.

  - Contain at least one lowercase character.

  - Conter pelo menos um dígito (número).


### Reset user password by email { #reset_user_password_by_email } 

To reset the password of a user by email:

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Usuários ** e clique em ** Usuário **.
2.  In the user list, click the menu icon of the relevant user and select "Reset password".
3.  Clique em ** Confirmar **.

The person owning the user account will receive an email with instructions for how to reset the password. The email is sent to the address specified for the user account. 

### Delete user { #delete_user } 

1.  Open the **Users** app and find the type of user you want to
    delete.

2.  In the user list, click the menu icon of the relevant user and
    select **Remove**.

3.  Clique em ** Confirmar **.

### Display details of user { #display_user_details } 

1.  Open the **Users** app and find user you want to view.

2.  In the user list, click the menu icon of the relevant user and
    select **Show details**.

### Disable Two Factor Authentication for a user { #user_disable_2fa }

If a user has enabled Two Factor Authentication and then loses access to
his/her authentication device (e.g. smartphone gets lost or broken),
this user will not be able to log into the system any more. To solve this
issue, a user manager can disable Two Factor Authentication for the
affected user, so that the user is able to access the system again using
just a password.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Usuários ** e clique em ** Usuários **.

2.  In the user list, click the menu icon of the relevant user and
    select **Disable Two Factor Authentication**.

3.  Clique em ** OK ** para confirmar

> **Note**
>
> The option to disable Two Factor Authentication will only be available
> for users that have set up Two Factor Authentication via the
> user-profile-app.

## Gerenciar funções de usuário { #mgt_userrole } 

### Criar uma função de usuário { #create_userrole } 


![](resources/images/dhis2UserManual/role_maintenance_page.png)

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Usuários ** e clique em ** Função do usuário **.

2.  Clique em ** Adicionar novo **.

3.  Insira um ** Nome **, por exemplo "Superusuário" ou "Usuário administrador".

4.  Insira uma ** Descrição **.

5.  In the **Authorities** section, select the authorities you want to
    give to the user role. You can also use the filter inputs above the
    authority section to search for a specific authority.

6.  Clique em ** Adicionar **.

### Edit user role { #edit-user-role } 

1.  Open the **Users** app and find the type of user role you want to
    edit.

2.  In the user list, directly click the relevant user role, or click the
    menu icon and select **Edit**.

3.  Modifique as opções que você deseja.

4.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Delete user role { #delete-user-role } 

1.  Open the **Users** app and find the user role you want to delete.

2.  In the user role list, click the menu icon of the relevant user and
    select **Remove**.

3.  Clique em ** Confirmar **.

### Display details of user role { #display-details-of-user-role } 

1.  Open the **Users** app and find the user role you want to view.

2.  In the user list, click the menu icon of the relevant user role and
    select **Show details**.

### Change sharing settings for user role { #change-sharing-settings-for-user-role } 

1.  Open the **Users** app and find the user role you want to modify.

2.  In the user list, click the relevant user role and select **Sharing
    settings**.

3.  (Optional) Search for a user group and select it, then click the
    plus icon. The user group is added to the list.

4.  (Opcional) Selecione ** Acesso externo (sem login) **.

    Note that this only gives access when no user is logged in.  To give
    access also to logged in users, you must also allow **Public access**.

5.  Altere as configurações dos grupos de usuários que deseja modificar.
 - **Nenhum**
 - ** Pode visualizar **: todos no grupo de usuários podem visualizar o objeto
 - ** Pode editar e visualizar **: todos no grupo de usuários podem visualizar e editar o objeto

6.  Clique em **Salvar**.

## Gerenciar grupos de usuários { #mgt_usergroup } 

### Crie um grupo de usuários { #create_usergroup } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Usuários ** e clique em ** Grupo de usuários **.

2.  Clique em ** Adicionar novo **.

3.  No campo ** Nome **, digite o nome do grupo de usuários.

4.  In the **Available users** section, double-click the users you want
    to add to the user group.

5.  In the **Available user groups** section, double-click the user
    groups you want to add to the user group.

6.  Clique em ** Adicionar **.

### Participar de grupos de usuários { #join_usergroup } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Usuários ** e clique em ** Grupo de usuários **.

2.  In the list, click the relevant user group and select **Join
    group**.

### Sair dos grupos de usuários { #leave_usergroup } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Usuários ** e clique em ** Grupo de usuários **.

2.  In the list, click the relevant user group and select **Leave
    group**.

### Edit user group { #edit-user-group } 

1.  Open the **Users** app and find the type of user group you want to
    edit.

2.  In the user group list, directly click the relevant user group, or click the
    menu icon and select **Edit**.

3.  Modifique as opções que você deseja.

4.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Delete user group { #delete-user-group } 

1.  Open the **Users** app and find the type of user group you want to
    delete.

2.  In the user group list, click the menu icon of the relevant user group and
    select **Remove**.

3.  Clique em ** OK ** para confirmar.

### Display details of user group { #display-details-of-user-group } 

1.  Open the **Users** app and find the user group you want to view.

2.  In the object list, click the menu icon of the relevant user group and
    select **Show details**.

### Change sharing settings for user group { #change-sharing-settings-for-user-group } 

1.  Open the **Users** app and find user you want to modify.

2.  In the user group list, click the relevant user group and select **Sharing
    settings**.

3.  (Optional) Search for a user group and select it, then click the
    plus icon. The user group is added to the list.

4.  (Opcional) Selecione ** Acesso externo (sem login) **.

    Note that this only gives access when no user is logged in.  To give
    access also to logged in users, you must also allow **Public access**.

5.  Altere as configurações dos grupos de usuários que deseja modificar.
 - **Nenhum**
 - ** Pode visualizar **: todos no grupo de usuários podem visualizar o objeto
 - ** Pode editar e visualizar **: todos no grupo de usuários podem visualizar e editar o objeto

6.  Clique em **Salvar**.

## Descentralize o gerenciamento de usuários { #decentralize-user-management } 

DHIS2 supports a concept for user management referred to as *managed
users* which allows to explicitly define which users should be allowed
to manage or modify which users. To "manage a user" implies that you can
see and modify that user. The basic concept for user management is that
you can see and modify users which you have been granted all of the
authorities; in other words you can modify users which have a subset of
your own authorities. The managed users concept gives you greater
control over this.

The managed users concept allows you to define which users should be
able to manage which users. This is configured through user groups and
memberships within such groups. A user group can be configured to be
allowed to manage other user groups from the standard add and update
user interface. The effect is that a specific user can manage all users
which are members of user groups which can be managed by a user group
that the user is member of. In other words, users can be managed by all
members of user groups which are managing user groups they are member
of.

To enable this concept you should grant users the authority to
"Add/update users within managed groups", and *not* grant access to the
standard "Add/update users" authority. An implication of the managed
users concept is that when creating a user with the "Add/update users
within managed groups" only, the user must be made a member of at least
one user group that the current user can manage. If not, the current
user would lose access to the user being created immediately. This is
validated by the system.

When granted the "Add/update users within managed groups" authority, the
system lets a user add members to user groups for which she has
read-only access to. The purpose of this is to allow for decentralized
user management. You may define a range of user groups where other users
may add or remove members, but not remove or change the name of the
group.

## Exemplo: gestão de usuários em um sistema de saúde { #user_mgt_example } 

In a health system, users are logically grouped with respect to the task
they perform and the position they occupy.

1.  Define which users should have the role as system administrators.
    They are often part of the national HIS division and should have
    full authority in the system.

2.  Crie aproximadamente uma função de usuário para cada posição.

Exemplos de posições comuns são:


| Position | Typical tasks | Recommended authorities | Comente |
|---|---|---|---|
| System administrators | Set up the basic structure (metadata) of the system. | Add, update and delete the core elements of the system, for example data elements, indicators and data sets. | Only system administrators should modify metadata. <br>If you allow users outside the system administrators team to modify the metadata, it might lead to problems with coordination.<br> <br>Updates to the system should only be performed by the administrators of the system. |
| National health managers<br> <br>Province health managers | Monitor and analyse data | Access to the reports module, the **GIS**, **Data Quality** apps and the dashboard. | Don't need access to enter data, modify data elements or data sets. |
| National health information system division officers (HISO)<br> <br>District health records and information officers (DHRIO)<br> <br>Facility health records and information officers (HRIO) | Enter data that comes from facilities which are not able to do so directly<br> <br>Monitor, evaluate and analyse data | Access to all the analysis and validation apps<br> <br>Access to the **Data Entry** app. | - |
| Data entry clerks | - | - | - |



# Autoridades do usuário { #user_authorities } 


|||
|---|---|
| Accept data at lower levels | F_ACCEPT_DATA_LOWER_LEVELS |
| Access my data mart | F_MYDATAMART_VIEW |
| Add Facility | F_FRED_CREATE |
| Add Locale | F_LOCALE_ADD |
| Add Option Set | F_OPTIONSET_ADD |
| Add Organisation Unit Group Set | F_ORGUNITGROUPSET_ADD |
| Add Program Rule | F_PROGRAM_RULE_ADD |
| Add Public Map | F_MAP_PUBLIC_ADD |
| Add Relationship Type | F_RELATIONSHIPTYPE_ADD |
| Add/Remove Members In Read-Only User Groups | F_USER_GROUPS_READ_ONLY_ADD_MEMBERS |
| Add SQL View | F_SQLVIEW_ADD |
| Add Tracked Entities | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_ADD |
| Add Tracked Entity Attribute Value | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_ATTRIBUTEVALUE_ADD |
| Add Tracked Entity Form | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_FORM_ADD |
| Add Tracked Entity Instance Comment | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_COMMENT_ADD |
| Add Tracked Entity Relationship | F_RELATIONSHIP_ADD |
| Add/Update Attribute | F_ATTRIBUTE_ADD |
| Add/Update Chart | F_CHART_ADD |
| Add/Update Concept | F_CONCEPT_ADD |
| Add/Update Constant | F_CONSTANT_ADD |
| Add/Update Data Value | F_DATAVALUE_ADD |
| Add/Update Indicator Type | F_INDICATORTYPE_ADD |
| Add/Update Min/max rule | F_DATAELEMENT_MINMAX_ADD |
| Add/Update Organisation Unit | F_ORGANISATIONUNIT_ADD |
| Add/Update Private Category Option Group | F_CATEGORY_OPTION_GROUP_PRIVATE_ADD |
| Add/Update Private Category Option Group Set | F_CATEGORY_OPTION_GROUP_SET_PRIVATE_ADD |
| Add/Update Private Data Element | F_DATAELEMENT_PRIVATE_ADD |
| Add/Update Private Data Element Category | F_CATEGORY_PRIVATE_ADD |
| Add/Update Private Data Element Category Combo | F_CATEGORY_COMBO_PRIVATE_ADD |
| Add/Update Private Data Element Category Option | F_CATEGORY_OPTION_PRIVATE_ADD |
| Add/Update Private Data Element Category Option Combo | F_CATEGORY_OPTION_COMBO_PRIVATE_ADD |
| Add/Update Private Data Element Groups | F_DATAELEMENTGROUP_PRIVATE_ADD |
| Add/Update Private Data Element Group Sets | F_DATAELEMENTGROUPSET_PRIVATE_ADD |
| Add/Update Private Data Set | F_DATASET_PRIVATE_ADD |
| Add/Update Private Document | F_DOCUMENT_PRIVATE_ADD |
| Add/Update Private Indicator | F_INDICATOR_PRIVATE_ADD |
| Add/Update Private Indicator Group | F_INDICATORGROUP_PRIVATE_ADD |
| Add/Update Private Indicator Group Sets | F_INDICATORGROUPSET_PRIVATE_ADD |
| Add/Update Private Option Set | F_OPTIONSET_PRIVATE_ADD |
| Add/Update Private Organisation Unit Group | F_ORGUNITGROUP_PRIVATE_ADD |
| Add/Update Private Organisation Unit Group Set | F_ORGUNITGROUPSET_PRIVATE_ADD |
| Add/Update Private Program | F_PROGRAM_PRIVATE_ADD |
| Add/Update Private Report | F_REPORT_PRIVATE_ADD |
| Add/Update Private SQL View | F_SQLVIEW_PRIVATE_ADD |
| Add/Update Private Tracked Entity Attribute | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_ATTRIBUTE_PRIVATE_ADD |
| Add/Update Private User Group | F_USERGROUP_PRIVATE_ADD |
| Add/Update Private User Role | F_USERROLE_PRIVATE_ADD |
| Add/Update Private Validation Rule Group | F_VALIDATIONRULEGROUP_PRIVATE_ADD |
| Add/Update Program Attribute | F_PROGRAM_ATTRIBUTE_ADD |
| Add/Update Program Indicator | F_ADD_PROGRAM_INDICATOR |
| Add/Update Program Stage | F_PROGRAMSTAGE_ADD |
| Add/Update Program Stage Section | F_PROGRAMSTAGE_SECTION_ADD |
| Add/Update Public Category Option Group | F_CATEGORY_OPTION_GROUP_PUBLIC_ADD |
| Add/Update Public Category Option Group Set | F_CATEGORY_OPTION_GROUP_SET_PUBLIC_ADD |
| Add/Update Public Chart | F_CHART_PUBLIC_ADD |
| Add/Update Public Dashboard | F_DASHBOARD_PUBLIC_ADD |
| Add/Update Public Data Element | F_DATAELEMENT_PUBLIC_ADD |
| Add/Update Public Data Element Category | F_CATEGORY_PUBLIC_ADD |
| Add/Update Public Data Element Category Combo | F_CATEGORY_COMBO_PUBLIC_ADD |
| Add/Update Public Data Element Category Option | F_CATEGORY_OPTION_PUBLIC_ADD |
| Add/Update Public Data Element Category Option | F_CATEGORY_OPTION_DELETE |
| Add/Update Public Data Element Category Option Combo | F_CATEGORY_OPTION_COMBO_PUBLIC_ADD |
| Add/Update Public Data Element Groups | F_DATAELEMENTGROUP_PUBLIC_ADD |
| Add/Update Public Data Element Group Sets | F_DATAELEMENTGROUPSET_PUBLIC_ADD |
| Add/Update Public Data Set | F_DATASET_PUBLIC_ADD |
| Add/Update Public Document | F_DOCUMENT_PUBLIC_ADD |
| Add/Update Public Indicator | F_INDICATOR_PUBLIC_ADD |
| Add/Update Public Indicator Group | F_INDICATORGROUP_PUBLIC_ADD |
| Add/Update Public Indicator Group Sets | F_INDICATORGROUPSET_PUBLIC_ADD |
| Add/Update Public Option Set | F_OPTIONSET_PUBLIC_ADD |
| Add/Update Public Organisation Unit Group | F_ORGUNITGROUP_PUBLIC_ADD |
| Add/Update Public Organisation Unit Group Set | F_ORGUNITGROUPSET_PUBLIC_ADD |
| Add/Update Public Program | F_PROGRAM_PUBLIC_ADD |
| Add/Update Public Report | F_REPORT_PUBLIC_ADD |
| Add/Update Public Report Table | F_REPORTTABLE_PUBLIC_ADD |
| Add/Update Public SQL View | F_SQLVIEW_PUBLIC_ADD |
| Add/Update Public Tracked Entity Attribute | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_ATTRIBUTE_PUBLIC_ADD |
| Add/Update Public User Group | F_USERGROUP_PUBLIC_ADD |
| Add/Update Public User Role | F_USERROLE_PUBLIC_ADD |
| Add/Update Public Validation Rule Group | F_VALIDATIONRULEGROUP_PUBLIC_ADD |
| Add/Update Section | F_SECTION_ADD |
| Add/Update Tracked Entity | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_ADD |
| Add/Update Tracked Entity Attributes | F_ALLOW_EDIT_TRACKED_ENTITY_ATTRIBUTES |
| Add/Update Tracked Entity Data Value | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_DATAVALUE_ADD |
| Add/Update Tracked Entity Instance | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_INSTANCE_ADD |
| Add/Update User | F_USER_ADD |
| Add/Update User Group Managing Relationships | F_USERGROUP_MANAGING_RELATIONSHIPS_ADD |
| Add/Update User Within Managed Group | F_USER_ADD_WITHIN_MANAGED_GROUP |
| Add/Update Validation Criteria | F_VALIDATIONCRITERIA_ADD |
| Add/Update Validation Rule | F_VALIDATIONRULE_ADD |
| Add Validation Rule Groups | F_VALIDATIONRULEGROUP_ADD |
| Administrate data mart | F_DATAMART_ADMIN |
| Administrate data mart | F_DATA_MART_ADMIN |
| Administrate data visualizer | F_DV_ADMIN |
| Administrate GIS | F_GIS_ADMIN |
| Aprovar dados | F_APPROVE_DATA |
| Approve data at lower levels | F_APPROVE_DATA_LOWER_LEVELS |
| Archive data | F_ARCHIVE_DATA |
| Change GIS Configuration | F_GIS_CONFIGURATION_UPDATE |
| Change Location of Tracked Entity Instance | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_INSTANCE_CHANGE_LOCATION |
| Change order in Data Set | F_DATASET_ORDER_CHANGE |
| Change system settings | F_SYSTEM_SETTING |
| Change Tracked Entity Instance Location | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_CHANGE_LOCATION |
| Chart External Access | F_CHART_EXTERNAL |
| Concept Management | F_CONCEPT_MANAGEMENT |
| Constant Management | F_CONSTANT_MANAGEMENT |
| Copy Excel Item | F_COPY_EXCEL_ITEM_ADMINISTRATION |
| Create and download backup | F_DASHBOARD_DOWNLOAD_BACKUP |
| Data Admin Locking | F_DATAADMIN_LOCK |
| Data Admin Unlocking | F_DATAADMIN_UNLOCK |
| Delete Attribute | F_ATTRIBUTE_DELETE |
| Delete Category Option Group | F_CATEGORY_OPTION_GROUP_DELETE |
| Delete Category Option Group Set | F_CATEGORY_OPTION_GROUP_SET_DELETE |
| Delete Chart | F_CHART_DELETE |
| Delete Concept | F_CONCEPT_DELETE |
| Delete Constant | F_CONSTANT_DELETE |
| Delete Data Element | F_DATAELEMENT_DELETE |
| Delete Data Element Category | F_CATEGORY_DELETE |
| Delete Data Element Category Combo | F_CATEGORY_COMBO_DELETE |
| Delete Data Element Groups | F_DATAELEMENTGROUP_DELETE |
| Delete Data Element Group Sets | F_DATAELEMENTGROUPSET_DELETE |
| Delete Data Set | F_DATASET_DELETE |
| Delete Data Value | F_DATAVALUE_DELETE |
| Delete Document | F_DOCUMENT_DELETE |
| Delete Excel Template | F_EXCEL_TEMPLATE_MANAGEMENT_DELETE |
| Delete Facility | F_FRED_DELETE |
| Delete Indicator | F_INDICATOR_DELETE |
| Delete Indicator Group | F_INDICATORGROUP_DELETE |
| Delete Indicator Group Sets | F_INDICATORGROUPSET_DELETE |
| Delete Indicator Type | F_INDICATORTYPE_DELETE |
| Delete Locale | F_LOCALE_DELETE |
| Delete Min/max rule | F_DATAELEMENT_MINMAX_DELETE |
| Delete Option Set | F_OPTIONSET_DELETE |
| Delete Organisation Unit | F_ORGANISATIONUNIT_DELETE |
| Delete Organisation Unit Group | F_ORGUNITGROUP_DELETE |
| Delete Organisation Unit Group Set | F_ORGUNITGROUPSET_DELETE |
| Delete Program | F_PROGRAM_DELETE |
| Delete Program Attribute | F_PROGRAM_ATTRIBUTE_DELETE |
| Delete Program Enrollment | F_PROGRAM_INSTANCE_DELETE |
| Delete Program Stage | F_PROGRAMSTAGE_DELETE |
| Delete Program Stage Section | F_PROGRAMSTAGE_SECTION_DELETE |
| Delete Relationship Type | F_RELATIONSHIPTYPE_DELETE |
| Delete Report | F_REPORT_DELETE |
| Delete Report Table | F_REPORTTABLE_DELETE |
| Delete Section | F_SECTION_DELETE |
| Delete SMS | F_MOBILE_DELETE_SMS |
| Delete SQL View | F_SQLVIEW_DELETE |
| Delete Tracked Entity | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_DELETE |
| Delete Tracked Entity Attribute | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_ATTRIBUTE_DELETE |
| Delete Tracked Entity Attribute Value | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_ATTRIBUTEVALUE_DELETE |
| Delete Tracked Entity Data Value | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_DATAVALUE_DELETE |
| Delete Tracked Entity Form | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_FORM_DELETE |
| Delete Tracked Entity Instance | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_INSTANCE_DELETE |
| Delete Tracked Entity Instance Comment | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_COMMENT_DELETE |
| Delete Tracked Entity Instance Visit | F_PROGRAM_STAGE_INSTANCE_DELETE |
| Delete Tracked Entity Relationship | F_RELATIONSHIP_DELETE |
| Delete User | F_USER_DELETE |
| Delete User Group | F_USERGROUP_DELETE |
| Delete User Role | F_USERROLE_DELETE |
| Delete User Within Managed Group | F_USER_DELETE_WITHIN_MANAGED_GROUP |
| Delete Validation Criteria | F_VALIDATIONCRITERIA_DELETE |
| Delete Validation Rule | F_VALIDATIONRULE_DELETE |
| Delete Validation Rule Group | F_VALIDATIONRULEGROUP_DELETE |
| Eliminate duplicate data elements | F_ELIMINATE_DUPLICATE_DATA_ELEMENTS |
| Excel Reporting Administration | F_EXCEL_REPORT_ADMINISTRATION |
| Execute SQL View | F_SQLVIEW_EXECUTE |
| Export Activity Plan to XLS file | F_ACTIVITY_PLAN_EXPORT |
| Export data | F_EXPORT_DATA |
| Export events | F_EXPORT_EVENTS |
| Export meta-Data | F_METADATA_EXPORT |
| Generate Activity Plans | F_GENERATE_ACTIVITY_PLANS |
| Generate min-max values | F_GENERATE_MIN_MAX_VALUES |
| Generate Program Statistics Report | F_GENERATE_STATISTICAL_PROGRAM_REPORT |
| Generate Program Summary Report | F_GENERATE_PROGRAM_SUMMARY_REPORT |
| Generate Tracked Entity Tabular report | F_GENERATE_BENEFICIARY_TABULAR_REPORT |
| Import data | F_IMPORT_DATA |
| Import events | F_IMPORT_EVENTS |
| Import from other systems | F_IMPORT_OTHER_SYSTEMS |
| Import GML | F_IMPORT_GML |
| Import meta-Data | F_METADATA_IMPORT |
| Insert custom Java script and CSS | F_INSERT_CUSTOM_JS_CSS |
| List Excel Template | F_EXCEL_TEMPLATE_MANAGEMENT_LIST |
| List Tracked Entity Instance | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_INSTANCE_LIST |
| List User Groups | F_USERGROUP_LIST |
| List User Roles | F_USERROLE_LIST |
| Load event reminder messages | F_PROGRAM_STAGE_INSTANCE_REMINDER |
| Load Tracked Entity Instance History | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_INSTANCE_HISTORY |
| Lock Data Set | F_DATASET_LOCK |
| Manage integration routes | F_MANAGE_INTEGRATION_ROUTES |
| Manage Program Indicators | F_PROGRAM_INDICATOR_MANAGEMENT |
| Manage Program Rule | F_PROGRAM_RULE_MANAGEMENT |
| Manage Tracked Entities | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_MANAGEMENT |
| Manage Tracked Entity Instance Reminders | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_INSTANCE_REMINDER_MANAGEMENT |
| Map External Access | F_MAP_EXTERNAL |
| Merge organisation units | F_MERGE_ORGANISATION_UNITS |
| Move Organisation Unit | F_ORGANISATIONUNIT_MOVE |
| Multiple Individual Data Entry | F_NAME_BASED_DATA_ENTRY |
| Option Set Management | F_OPTIONSET_MANAGEMENT |
| Organisation Unit Registration | F_ORGANISATION_REGISTRATION |
| Perform maintenance tasks | F_PERFORM_MAINTENANCE |
| Program Enrollment | F_PROGRAM_ENROLLMENT |
| Program Event Management | F_PROGRAM_INSTANCE_MANAGEMENT |
| Program Stage Section Management | F_PROGRAMSTAGE_SECTION_MANAGEMENT |
| Program Tracking Management | F_PROGRAM_TRACKING_MANAGEMENT |
| Program Un-enrollment | F_PROGRAM_UNENROLLMENT |
| Prune organisation units | F_PRUNE_ORGANISATION_UNITS |
| Remove Empty Tracked Entity Events | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_REMOVE_EMPTY_EVENTS |
| Rename Excel Template file | F_EXCEL_TEMPLATE_MANAGEMENT_RENAME |
| Report Table External Access | F_REPORTTABLE_EXTERNAL |
| Run validation | F_RUN_VALIDATION |
| Scheduling Administration | F_SCHEDULING_ADMIN |
| Scheduling case aggregate query builder | F_SCHEDULING_CASE_AGGREGATE_QUERY_BUILDER |
| Scheduling send messages | F_SCHEDULING_SEND_MESSAGE |
| Search Activity Plan | F_ACTIVITY_PLAN |
| Search events without registration | F_PROGRAM_STAGE_INSTANCE_SEARCH |
| Search events with registration | F_PROGRAM_TRACKING_SEARCH |
| Search Tracked Entity Instance | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_INSTANCE_SEARCH |
| Search Tracked Entity Instance in All Org Units | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_INSTANCE_SEARCH_IN_ALL_ORGUNITS |
| See API Module | M_dhis-web-api |
| See Apps Maintenance module | M_dhis-web-maintenance-appmanager |
| See Browser Cache Cleaner module | M_dhis-web-cache-cleaner |
| See Dashboard integration module | M_dhis-web-dashboard-integration |
| See Dashboard module | M_dhis-web-dashboard |
| See Data Administration module | M_dhis-web-maintenance-dataadmin |
| See Data Elements and Indicators Maintenance module | M_dhis-web-maintenance-datadictionary |
| See Data Entry module | M_dhis-web-dataentry |
| See Data Mart module | M_dhis-web-datamart |
| See Data Set Maintenance module | M_dhis-web-maintenance-dataset |
| See Data Visualizer module | M_dhis-web-visualizer |
| See Event Capture module | M_dhis-web-event-capture |
| See Event Reports module | M_dhis-web-event-reports |
| See Event Visualizer module | M_dhis-web-event-visualizer |
| See Excel Report module | M_dhis-web-excel-reporting |
| See Export Data Mart Module | M_dhis-web-exportdatamart |
| See FRED API Module | M_dhis-web-api-fred |
| See GIS module | M_dhis-web-gis |
| See GIS module | M_dhis-web-mapping |
| See Import-Export module | M_dhis-web-importexport |
| See Individual Records | M_dhis-web-caseentry |
| See Light module | M_dhis-web-light |
| See Line-listing DataEntry module | M_dhis-web-dataentry-national |
| See Mobile Maintenance module | M_dhis-web-maintenance-mobile |
| See NRHM Reports module | M_dhis-web-reports |
| See Organisation Unit Maintenance module | M_dhis-web-maintenance-organisationunit |
| See Pivot Table module | M_dhis-web-pivot |
| See Report module | M_dhis-web-reporting |
| See Settings Maintenance module | M_dhis-web-maintenance-settings |
| See Smartphone module | M_dhis-web-mobile |
| See SMS module | M_dhis-web-sms |
| See Tracked Entity And Programs module | M_dhis-web-maintenance-program |
| See Tracker Capture module | M_dhis-web-tracker-capture |
| See User Maintenance module | M_dhis-web-maintenance-user |
| See Validation Analysis module | M_dhis-web-validationrule-local-in |
| See Validation Rule module | M_dhis-web-validationrule |
| Send message | F_SEND_MESSAGE |
| Send SMS | F_MOBILE_SENDSMS |
| Set mobile settings | F_MOBILE_SETTINGS |
| Single Event Without Registration Data Entry | F_ANONYMOUS_DATA_ENTRY |
| Single Event With Registration Data Entry | F_SINGLE_EVENT_DATA_ENTRY |
| Sql View External Access | F_SQLVIEW_EXTERNAL |
| Sql View Management | F_SQLVIEW_MANAGEMENT |
| Tracked Entity Aggregation | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_AGGREGATION |
| Tracked Entity Form Management | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_FORM_MANAGEMENT |
| Tracked Entity Instance Dashboard | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_INSTANCE_DASHBOARD |
| Tracked Entity Instance Management | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_INSTANCE_MANAGEMENT |
| Tracked Entity Relationship Management | F_RELATIONSHIP_MANAGEMENT |
| Update Facility | F_FRED_UPDATE |
| Update Organisation Unit Level | F_ORGANISATIONUNITLEVEL_UPDATE |
| Update Program Rule | F_PROGRAM_RULE_UPDATE |
| Update Relationship Type | F_RELATIONSHIPTYPE_UPDATE |
| Update Tracked Entities | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_UPDATE |
| Update Tracked Entity Attribute | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_ATTRIBUTE_EDIT |
| Upload Excel Template | F_EXCEL_TEMPLATE_MAMAGEMENT_UPLOAD |
| View and Search Tracked Entity Attributes and Identifiers | F_ACCESS_TRACKED_ENTITY_ATTRIBUTES |
| View data browser | F_VIEW_DATABROWSER |
| View Program Stage Completeness Report | F_PROGRAM_STAGE_COMPLETENESS |
| View program tracking | F_PROGRAM_TRACKING_LIST |
| View Report | F_REPORT_VIEW |
| View Tracked Entity Attribute | F_TRACKED_ENTITY_ATTRIBUTE_VIEW |
| View unapproved data | F_VIEW_UNAPPROVED_DATA |
| View User | F_USER_VIEW |
| View User Group Managing Relationships | F_USERGROUP_MANAGING_RELATIONSHIPS_VIEW |
| View User Within Managed Group | F_USER_VIEW_WITHIN_MANAGED_GROUP |
| Delete tracked entity instance and associated enrollments and events | F_TEI_CASCADE_DELETE |
| Delete enrollment and associated events | F_ENROLLMENT_CASCADE_DELETE |
| Edit expired data | F_EDIT_EXPIRED |




# Sobre o compartilhamento de objetos { #sharing } 

Este capítulo discute o compartilhamento de recursos de entidades no DHIS2.

## Compartilhamento de objetos { #sharing-of-objects } 

Many objects in DHIS2, like reports, charts, maps and indicators, can be
shared. DHIS2 supports sharing of metadata or sharing of data. Sharing of
metadata means making an object, like a report, available for reading or
modification to a group of users or to everyone. Sharing of data means
making the actual data captured available to others, and controlling who
can capture that kind of data. For instance for reports, the sharing
dialog can be opened by clicking on the "Sharing settings" button next
to each report in the list. Implementers can use this feature to allow
access to certain objects to only certain user groups. Users can use the
feature to decide who they would like to share objects (such as pivot
tables, charts, dashboards, etc) with.

If sharing is supported for a particular class of objects, a dialog will
be available called "Sharing settings", usually available by clicking on
the name of the object or in the analytics tools, through an icon (Share
with other people). Once you have accessed the sharing settings for the
object you wish to share, a dialog similar to the one below will be
shown.

![](resources/images/maintenance/mtn_sharing_dialog.png)

You can share your report with everyone or with a number of user groups.
"External access" can be enabled to allow this resource to be shared
with everyone, including users which cannot logon to DHIS2. This is
useful for sharing public resources with external systems. Note, that if
objects are shared externally, then they are visible to anyone who has
access to the URL which provides the resource without any login
credentials. Also note that "External access" ***does not*** give access
to logged in users—to give them access, you must also allow 
"Public access".

Next to "Public access" you can choose your public access option under
"METADATA": "No access", "Can view only" or "Can edit and view", and
under "DATA": "No access", "Can view data", "Can capture data". Public
access refers to users which are logged into the system. Edit also
implies deleting the report.

To share with a group, simply start typing the name of the group and the
"Search for user groups" input field and select your desired group.
Click on the "+" icon next to the input field to share with that group.
For each group you can set an access option, similar to public access.

Sharing with a user group implies that all users in that group will get
access to the shared object. To create a user group you can go to the
dashboard module and click on "Groups". This will lead you to the list
of groups where you can click "Add new" in the top right corner.
Creating user groups is open for everyone from the dashboard module.

## Compartilhamento de metadados e controle de acesso { #metadata-sharing-and-access-control } 

The objects which support metadata sharing are indicator, indicator
group, indicator group set, data dictionary, data set, program, standard
report, resource, report table, chart, map and user group. Out of those
objects, report table, chart, map and user group are open for everyone
to create privately. Private means that the objects are available only
to yourself or potentially to a number of user groups if you choose to
share the object. These objects are referred to as "open" objects and
can be created by all users. The remaining objects require that your
user account has the authority to create them. These objects are
referred to as "non-open" objects.

A user can be granted the authority to create publicly accessible
objects or privately accessible objects. In order to create a publicly
accessible object (available for viewing or editing by anyone) your user
account must have the authority to do so. As an example, to create a
publicly accessible chart, your user must have the "Create public chart"
authority granted. The authority to create private objects applies only
to non-open objects. For example, to allow a user to create indicators
which will only be accessible to that user and not to everyone, the user
can be issued with the "Create private indicator" authority.

Sharing a non-open object with another person and let her edit the
object requires that the person's user account has the authority for
updating that type of objects granted. For instance, if you want to let
another person edit your indicator, that person's user account must have
the "Update indicator" authority granted. This does not apply for open
objects.

When you create a new object it will automatically become viewable for
everyone if your user account has the authority to create public
objects. As an example, if you create a standard report and you have the
"Create public standard report" authority granted, the report will
become viewable for everyone. If you do not have that authority granted
the report will be viewable only to yourself. After you have created an
object, you may navigate to the "Sharing settings" dialog and set your
desired access control level.

If you need a user account which is able to view absolutely all objects
you can create a user role with the "ALL" authority and assign a user to
that role. If you need to switch between a "complete" view of objects
and a "personal" view of objects it is recommended to create two user
accounts, one assigned with the "ALL" authority and one without.

## Compartilhamento de metadados aplicado { #metadata-sharing-applied } 

The metadata sharing functionality is useful in several scenarios. One
use-case is setting up a DHIS2 instance for a global organisation with
operations in multiple countries. Typically the organisation has a set
of global data sets, indicators and reports which should apply to all
countries, while all countries will have the need for country-specific
data sets, indicators and reports. In this scenario the following
approach could work:

  - Configure um grupo de usuários para pessoal global.

  - Configure um grupo de usuários para o pessoal em cada país.

  - Create global data sets and reports, make them viewable for everyone
    and editable for the global user group only.

  - Create country-specific data sets and reports, make them viewable
    and editable for the country user group and the global user group
    only.

This way, the global indicators and reports could be viewed and analysed
by everyone, but maintained by the global user group only. The
country-specific data sets, indicators and reports could be viewed and
maintained by the country and global personnel, without being visible or
impacting the system for other countries in the organisation.

A similar approach could work for a scenario with a donor, multiple
funding agencies and implementing partners in a country, where user
groups could be set up for each of those entities. That way each
implementing partner could create and share their reports within their
organisation without affecting or allowing access to others. Reports
could also be shared with supervisors and funding agencies at the end of
reporting periods.

Another use-case is a country department of health with multiple health
programs. Typically there is a need for having general reports and
charts for the department while allowing the health programs to develop
specific reports and charts for internal use. This can be achieved by
creating user groups for each health program. Later, when developing
reports and charts, these can be made viewable and editable to the
program user group only. This way the reports will not be visible to
other programs and users. This is beneficial because the reports are
kept internal to the program and because the visible list of reports of
other users are kept shorter and more relevant.

## Compartilhamento de dados e controle de acesso { #data-sharing-and-access-control } 

The objects which support data sharing are data set, tracked entity
type, program and program stage. The purpose of data sharing is to
control which users can capture data, and which users can see the data
captured.

### Compartilhamento de dados para programas baseados em eventos { #data-sharing-for-event-based-programs } 

Applies to the object types of tracked entity type, program and program
stage. When working with single event programs in event capture, a user
will have to possess the "DATA:Can view data" sharing level to see the
program and its data. Without this sharing level, the program and its
data will not be visible to the user. When working with tracker programs
in tracker capture, the user will need to have "DATA:Can view data" to
both the tracked entity type and program. In case of a tracker program,
the user will also need "DATA:Can view data" on each program stage
individually to be able to see the data within the program. To capture
data the user needs the "DATA:Can capture data" sharing level.

> **Note**
>
> To see and capture data for a program, a data capture user also needs
> to report for an organisation unit to where the program has been
> assigned.



Table: Data sharing for tracker programs

| Object type | Can view data | Can capture data | Comente |
|---|---|---|---|
| **Tracked entity type** | * Search for tracked entities with this tracked entity type.<br> * See tracked entity type attribute values for this tracked entity type. | * Edit visible tracked entity attributes for tracked entity instances of this type.<br> * Register/create new tracked entity instances of this type.<br> * Delete tracked entity instances of this type.<br> * Deactivate/reactivate tracked entity instances of this type. ||
| **Programa** | * Search for tracked entities within this program.<br> * See tracked entity attributes specific to this program.<br> * See enrollment details for the program.<br> * See notes for the enrollment. | * Enroll into the program.<br> * Edit enrollment details for the program.<br> * Complete/reopen enrollments into the program.<br> * Add notes for the program.<br> * Edit relationships for the program.<br> * Send message to tracked entity instance.<br> * Delete enrollments in the program. | Both "Can view data" and "Can capture data" also requires the user to have "Can view data" for the tracked entity type. |
| **Program stage** | * See the program stage and its events and data within an enrollment.<br> * See the program stage notes. | * Add/schedule/refer a new event within the program stage.<br> * Complete/reopen the events within the program stage.<br> * Edit tracked entity data values within events in the program stage.<br> * Add notes for events in the program stage.<br> * Delete events in the program stage. | Both "Can view data" and "Can capture data" also requires the user to have "Can view data" for the program and the tracked entity type. |



Table: Data sharing for single event programs

| Object type | Can view data | Can capture data | Comente |
|---|---|---|---|
| **Programa** | * See list of events within the program.<br> * See tracked entity data values for events in the program. | * Add new events into the program.<br> * Edit data for events in the program.<br> * Delete events in the program. ||

### Compartilhamento de dados para conjuntos de dados { #data-sharing-for-data-sets } 

Applies to the object types of data set and category option . When
working in Data Entry app, the user will need to have "DATA:Can capture
data" to both see and capture data in the data set. To save data for an
entry field in Data Set users need:

1.  Authority: F\_DATAVALUE\_ADD ( Can add data value )

2.  O conjunto de dados é compartilhado com "Dados: pode capturar dados"

3.  O elemento de dados é compartilhado com "Metadados: pode visualizar"

4.  All Category Options used by selected Data Set are shared with
    "Data: Can capture data"

> **Note**
>
> To see and capture data for a data set, a data capture user also needs
> to report for an organisation unit to where the data set has been
> assigned.



Table: Data sharing for data sets

| Object type | Can view data | Can capture data | Comente |
|---|---|---|---|
| **Data set** | * View Data Set's data in Analytics | * Can see DataSet in Data Entry app<br> * Can save data for Data Set using API | For saving data value in Data Entry app, users also need "Can capture data" for Category Options within selected Data Set. |
| **CategoryOption** | * Can view data values belong to shared Category Option in analytics | * Can save data value for input fields in Data Entry app which belongs to shared Category Options. | For CategoryOptionCombo and AttributeOptionCombo to be writeable, all belongs CategoryOptions must be shared with "Can capture data". |



# Configure DHIS2 Maps { #gis_creating }

## Contexto { #gis_creating_context }

Setting up DHIS2 Maps simply means storing coordinates for the organisation
units you want to show on the map in the database. Coordinates are often
distributed in proprietary formats and will need to be converted to a
format which DHIS2 understands. ESRI shapefile is a common
geospatial vector data format for desktop applications. You might find
shapefiles for your country [here](http://www.diva-gis.org/gdata) or in
many other geospatial data repositories on the web. Some amount of work
needs to be done in order to use these coordinates in DHIS2 Maps, namely
transforming the data into a suitable format and ensuring the name which
are contained in the geospatial data match exactly with the names of the
organization units which they should be matched to.

Only organisation units with POINT geometry types can be edited through the
Maintenance app at this time. To modify POLYGON geometries, please us the
**Org unit geometry import** in the Import/Export app.

To edit the POINT coordinates of an organisation unit, open the Maintenance
App and navigate to the Organisation Unit section. Click on the Organisation
Unit you would like to view or edit, you can search or filter the list from
on the left-hand side of the screen. Once an organisation unit is selected,
you can edit the **Latitude** and **Longitude** values to update the POINT
coordinates. If the Organisation Unit has a POLYGON geometry, the coordinates
cannot be edited.

If you are going to add or update coordinates for a large number of units, or
if you need to update polygon geometries, you should use the automatic
**Org unit geometry import** explained in the following section.

> **Important**
>
> The only coordinate reference system (CRS) supported by DHIS2 is EPSG:4326,
> also known as geographic longitude/latitude. Coordinates must be
> stored with the longitude (east/west position) proceeding the latitude
> (north/south position). If your vector data is in a different CRS than
> EPSG 4326, you will need to reproject the data first before importing
> into DHIS2.

## Importing coordinates in GeoJSON format { #geojson_creating_setup }

Step 1 - Convert geospatial data to GeoJSON format

Skip this step if your data is already in GeoJSON format using geographic
longitude/latitude.

The recommended tool for geographical format conversions is called
"ogr2ogr". This should be available for most Linux distributions
`sudo apt-get install gdal-bin`. For Windows, go to
<http://fwtools.maptools.org/>and download "FWTools", install it and open
up the FWTools command shell. During the format conversion we also want
to ensure that the output has the correct coordinate projection
(called EPSG:4326 with geographic longitude and latitude). For a more
detailed reference of geographic coordinates, please refer to this
[site](http://www.epsg-registry.org/). If you have already reprojected
the geographic data to the geographic latitude/longitude (EPSG:4326) system,
there is no need to explicitly define the output coordinate system, assuming
that `ogr2ogr` can determine the input spatial reference system. Note that
most GeoJSON files use the EPSG:4326 system. You can determine the
spatial reference system by executing the following command.

    ogrinfo -al -so filename.shp

This command assumes your geospatial data is in ESRI Shapefile (.shp) format,
but [several other formats are supported](https://gdal.org/drivers/vector/).

Assuming that the projection is reported to be EPSG:27700 by `ogrinfo`,
we can transform it to EPSG:4326 by executing the following
command.

    ogr2ogr -s_srs EPSG:27700 -t_srs EPSG:4326 -f GeoJSON filename.geojson filename.shp

If the geographic data is already in EPSG:4326, you can simply transform
the shapefile to GeoJSON by executing the following command.

    ogr2ogr -f GeoJSON filename.geojson filename.shp

You will find the created GeoJSON file in the same folder as the shapefile.

Step 2 - Simplify/generalize your geographical data

The boundaries in geographical data files are usually very accurate, too
much so for the needs of a web-based GIS. This usually does not affect
the performance when using GIS files on a local system, but it is
usually necessary to optimize the geographical data for the web-based
GIS system of DHIS2. All geographical data needs to be downloaded from
the server and rendered in a browser, so if the data is overly complex,
the performance of the DHIS2 Maps will be negatively impacted. This
optimization process can be described as follows:

For polygons, we can make the boundary lines less detailed by
removing some of the line points. This generalization will
lead to degradation of the polygon. However, after
a bit of experimentation, an optimal level of generalization can be
found, where the accuracy of the polygon is visually acceptable, and the
performance is optimal. Make a backup of your files
before you start. One possible method is the use of
[MapShaper](http://www.mapshaper.org/) which is an online tool which can
be used to generalize geographical data. To use MapShaper, simply upload
your files to the site. Then, click on _Simplify_ in the top menu and
select a simplification method. A slider will show at the top of the screen
that starts at 100%. It is usually acceptable to drag it up to about 30%.
When you are happy with the result, click "Export" in the top right
corner. Select the "GeoJSON" file format and click the Export button to
download the file. Move on to the next step with your new simplified
GeoJSON file.

Step 3 - Prepare the GeoJSON file

Unfortunately, the GeoJSON file is not ready for importation yet. Open it in
a robust text editor like Geany (Linux) or Notepad++ (Windows). GeoJSON is
a JSON based format. In the GeoJSON file an organisation unit is represented as a
Feature. Every feature should have a geometry, properties (attributes) and
they can have an id.

In order to import geospatial data from a GeoJSON file, DHIS2 must match
each of them with an organisation unit in its database. Each GeoJSON
feature must, in other words, contain a reference to its corresponding
organisation unit. The reference itself must be one of three possible
DHIS2 identifiers: **uid**, **code** or **name**.

By default we will try to match the organisation unit uid with the GeoJSON
feature id. You can add or change the id field so it matches the uid for
the organisasjon unit. You can also match by a property from the GeoJSON
feature properties. The property can be matched with organisation **uid**,
**code** or **name**.

Please note that the identifier used must **uniquely** identify an
organisation unit (e.g. if there are two organisation units in the
database of the same name or code, these cannot be matched properly on
either). As _uid_ is the only guaranteed-to-be-unique identifier it is
the most robust choice. However, as matching on name is usually easier
(given that the name is already part of your data).

Have a brief look at the identifiers and compare them to the
corresponding values in the database. If they seem to match fairly good,
it is about time to do a preview in the import-export module.

Go to the **Import/Export app** and click **Org Unit geometry import**.
Select the GeoJSON file and how you want to match the GeoJSON features to
the organisation units. Click **Start dry run** and look at the summary.
Look for new/updated organisation units. Our intention is to add coordinates
to already existing organisation units in the database, so we want as many
updates as possible and 0 new. Those listed as new will be created as
root units and mess up the organisation unit trees in DHIS2. If any listed
as new, click the number and the organisation units in question will appear
in the list below. If there are any slight misspellings compared to the
organisation unit names in the database - fix them and start dry run again.
Otherwise, click the "discard all" button below the list and then the
**Start import** button.

If the import process completes successfully, you should now be able to
utilize the geographical data in the DHIS2 Maps. If not, check the log
for hints and look for common errors such as:

\- Name duplicates in the GeoJSON file. The name column in the database is
unique and does not accept two organisation units with the same name.

\- The "shortname" column in the organisationunit table in your database
has a too small varchar definition. Increase it to 100.

\- Special name characters in the GeoJSON file.

\- Wrongly formatted input GeoJSON, use [GeoJSONLint](https://geojsonlint.com/)
to test the content.

## Importing coordinates in GML format { #gis_creating_setup }

Etapa 1 - Simplifique / generalize seus dados geográficos

The boundaries in geographical data files are usually very accurate, too
much so for the needs of a web-based GIS. This usually does not affect
the performance when using GIS files on a local system, but it is
usually necessary to optimize the geographical data for the web-based
GIS system of DHIS2. All geographical data needs to be downloaded from
the server and rendered in a browser, so if the data is overly complex,
the performance of the DHIS2 Maps will be negatively impacted. This
optimization process can be described as follows:

For polygons, we can make the boundary lines less detailed by
removing some of the line points. This generalization will
lead to degradation of the polygon. However, after
a bit of experimentation, an optimal level of generalization can be
found, where the accuracy of the polygon is visually acceptable, and the
performance is optimal. Make a backup of your shapefiles
before you start. One possible method is the use of
[MapShaper](http://www.mapshaper.org/) which is an online tool which can
be used to generalize geographical data. To use MapShaper, simply upload your files to the site. Then, click on Simplify in the top menu and select a simplification method. A slider will show at the top of the screen that starts at 100%. It is usually acceptable to drag it up to about 30%. When you are happy with the result, click "Export" in the top right corner. Select GeoJSON file format and click the Export button to download the file to your computer.

Step 2 - Convert to GML

The recommended tool for geographical format conversions is called
"ogr2ogr". This should be available for most Linux distributions `sudo apt-get install gdal-bin`. For Windows, go to <http://fwtools.maptools.org/> and download
"FWTools", install it and open up the FWTools command shell. During the
format conversion we also want to ensure that the output has the correct
coordinate projection (called EPSG:4326 with geographic longitude and
latitude). For a more detailed reference of geographic coordinates,
please refer to this [site](http://www.epsg-registry.org/). If you have
already reprojected the geographic data to the geographic
latitude/longitude (EPSG:4326) system, there is no need to explicitly
define the output coordinate system, assuming that `ogr2ogr` can
determine the input spatial reference system. Note that most shapefiles
are using the EPSG:4326 system. You can determine the spatial reference
system by executing the following command.

    ogrinfo -al -so filename.json

Assuming that the projection is reported to be EPSG:27700 by `ogrinfo`,
we can transform it to EPSG:4326 by executing the following
command.

    ogr2ogr -s_srs EPSG:27700 -t_srs EPSG:4326 -f GML filename.gml filename.json

If the geographic data is already in EPSG:4326, you can simply transform
the shapefile to GML by executing the following command.

    ogr2ogr -f GML filename.gml filename.json

Você encontrará o arquivo GML criado na mesma pasta do shapefile.

Etapa 3 - Prepare o arquivo GML

Unfortunately, the GML file is not ready for importation yet. Open it in
a robust text editor like Geany (Linux) or Notepad++ (Windows). GML is
an XML based format which means that you will recognize the regular XML
tag hierarchy. In the GML file an organisation unit is represented as a
\<gml:featureMember\>. Inside the feature members we usually find a lot
of attributes, but we are just going to import their coordinates.

In order to import geospatial data from the feature members of the GML
input, DHIS2 must match each of them with an organisation unit in its
database. The feature member element must, in other words, contain a
reference to its corresponding organisation unit. The reference itself
must be one of three possible DHIS2 identifiers: **uid**, **code** or
**name**. The identifier of choice must be provided as a property for
each feature member element. The importer will look for a property with
the local name of either _Uid_, _Code_ or _Name_, e.g. "ogr:Name" or
"anyPrefix:Code".

If your feature members already contain a property of the identifier you
wish to use (such as the name of an area) you can use search and replace
in a text editor to rename these elements to a name DHIS2 will recognize
(see the below table). This is typically a workflow which is applicable
when using the name as the identifier (the source shapefile or even GML
will usually contain the name for each area it defines).

Table: Organisation unit identifiers supported for GML import

| Matching priority | Identifier | Valid spellings  | Guaranteed unique |
| ----------------- | ---------- | ---------------- | ----------------- |
| 1                 | Uid        | uid, Uid, UID    | sim               |
| 2                 | Code       | code, Code, CODE | Não                |
| 3                 | Nome       | name, Name, NAME | Não                |

In the case of renaming properties one would usually find a tag named
something like "ogr:DISTRICT*NAME", "ogr:NAME_1" and rename it to
"ogr:Name". If using the \_code* or _uid_ identifiers on the other hand,
looking up the correct values in the DHIS2 database and going through
the GML file, adding the properties for each corresponding feature
member might be necessary. In any of the cases it is important to
realize that the identifier used must **uniquely** identify an
organisation unit (e.g. if there are two organisation units in the
database of the same name or code, these cannot be matched properly on
either). As _uid_ is the only guaranteed-to-be-unique identifier it is
the most robust choice. However, as matching on name is usually easier
(given that the name is already part of your data), a viable approach to
solving uniqueness conflicts can be to match any non-uniquely named
organisation units on a different identifier (uid, preferably) and the
rest on their names.

As can be seen in the above table there is a matching priority, meaning
is any two or more identifiers are provided for the same feature member,
matching will be performed on the highest priority identifier. Note also
the valid properties which can be used in you GML. The namespace prefix
is not important as only the local name is used.

A common pitfall of performing preparation of the GML files is syntax-
or element naming errors. Therefore please make sure that all properties
of the GML file are started and terminated with correctly corresponding
tags. Also make sure the properties follow either of the given valid
spellings of the property name. The identifying properties are supposed
to look like e.g. \<ogr:Name\>Moyamba District\</ogr:Name\>,
\<somePrefix:uid\>x7uuia898nJ\</somePrefix:uid\> or
\<CODE\>OU*12345\</CODE\>. Another common error is not making sure the
identifier matches exactly, especially when using the \_name* property.
All matches are performed on exact values, meaning that "Moyamba" in a
source GML file would not be matched against "Moyamba District" in the
database.

Have a brief look at the identifiers and compare them to the
corresponding values in the database. If they seem to match fairly good,
it is about time to do a preview in the import-export module.

Go to the **Import/Export app**, click **Org Unit geometry import** and select the **GML** format. Select the GML file and click **Start dry run** and look at the summary. Look for new/updated organisation units. Our
intention is to add coordinates to already existing organisation units
in the database, so we want as many updates as possible and 0 new. Those
listed as new will be created as root units and mess up the organisation
unit trees in DHIS2. If any listed as new, click the number and the
organisation units in question will appear in the list below. If there
are any slight misspellings compared to the organisation unit names in
the database - fix them and do the preview again. Otherwise, click the
"discard all" button below the list and then the "Import all" button
above the list.

If the import process completes successfully, you should now be able to
utilize the geographical data in the DHIS2 GIS. If not, check the log
for hints and look for common errors such as:

\- Name duplicates in the GML file. The name column in the database is
unique and does not accept two organisation units with the same name.

\- The "shortname" column in the organisationunit table in your database
has a too small varchar definition. Increase it to 100.

\- Special name characters in the GML file. Be sure to convert these to
appropriate XML equivalents or escape sequences.

\ - GML de entrada formatada incorretamente, tags não correspondentes



# Configure a funcionalidade de relatório { #setting_up_reporting } 

## Fontes de dados para relatórios { #reporting_data_sources } 

### Tipos de dados e agregação { #types-of-data-and-aggregation } 

In the bigger picture of HIS terminology all data in DHIS2 are usually
called aggregated as they are aggregates (e.g. monthly summaries) of
medical records or some kind of service registers reported from the
health facilities. Aggregation inside DHIS2 however, which is the topic
here, is concerned with how the raw data captured in DHIS2 (through data
entry or import)are further aggregated over time (e.g. from monthly to
quarterly values) or up the organisational hierarchy (e.g. from facility
to district values).

#### Terminologia { #terminology } 

  - *Raw data* refers to data that is registered into the DHIS2 either
    through data entry or data import, and has not been manipulated by
    the DHIS2 aggregation process. All these data are stored in the
    table (or Java object if you prefer) called DataValue.

  - *Aggregated data* refers to data that has been aggregated by the
    DHIS2, meaning it is no longer raw data, but some kind of aggregate
    of the raw data.

  - *Indicator values* can also be understood as aggregated data, but
    these are special in the way that they are calculated based on user
    defined formulas (factor \* numerator/denominator). Indicator values
    are therefore processed data and not raw data, and are located in
    the aggregatedindicatorvalue table/object. Indicators are calculated
    at any level of the organisational hierarchy and these calculations
    are then based on the aggregated data values available at each
    level. A level attribute in the aggregateddatavalue table refers to
    the organisational level of the orgunit the value has been
    calculated for.

  - *Period and Period type* are used to specify the time dimension of
    the raw or aggregated values, and data can be aggregated from one
    period type to another, e.g. from monthly to quarterly, or daily to
    monthly. Each data value has one period and that period has one
    period type. E.g. data values for the periods Jan, Feb, and Mar
    2009, all of the monthly period type can be aggregated together to
    an aggregated data value with the period Q1 2009 and period type
    Quarterly.

#### Regras básicas de agregação { #basic-rules-of-aggregation } 

##### O que é adicionado junto { #what-is-added-together } 

Data (raw) can be registered at any organisational level, e.g. at
national hospital at level 2, a health facility at level 5, or at a
bigger PHC at level 4. This varies form country to country, but DHIS2 is
flexible in allowing data entry or data import to take place at any
level. This means that orgunits that themselves have children can
register data, sometimes the same data elements as their children units.
The basic rule of aggregation in DHIS2 is that *all raw data is
aggregated together*, meaning data registered at a facility on level 5
is added to the data registered for a PHC at level 4.

It is up to the user/system administrator/designer to make sure that no
duplication of data entry is taking place and that e.g. data entered at
level 4 are not about the same services/visits that are reported by
orgunit children at level 5. 

> **NOTE**
>
> In some cases you want to have
duplication of data in the system, but in a controlled manner. E.g. when
you have two different sources of data for population estimates, both
level 5 catchment population data and another population data source for
level 4 based on census data (because sum of level 5 catchments is not
always the same as level 4 census data). Then you can specify using
advanced aggregation settings (see further down) that the system should
e.g. not add level 5 population data to the level 4 population data, and
that level 3,2,1 population data aggregates are only based on level 4
data and does not include level 5 data.

##### Como os dados são adicionados juntos { #how-data-gets-added-together } 

How data is aggregated depends on the dimension of aggregation (see
further down).

Along the orgunit level dimension data is always summed up; i.e. simply added
together. Note that raw data is never percentages, and therefore can be
summed together. Indicator values that can be percentages are treated
differently (re-calculated at each level, never summed up).

Along the time dimension there are several possibilities, the two most
common ways to aggregate are sum and average. The user can specify for
each data element which method to use by setting the aggregation
operator (see further down). Monthly service data are normally summed
together over time, e.g. the number of vaccines given in a year is the
sum of the vaccines given for each month of that year. For population,
equipment, staff and other kind of what is often called semi-permanent
data the average method is often the one to use, as, e.g. 'number of
nurses' working at a facility in a year would not be the sum of the two
numbers reported in the six-monthly staffing report, but rather the
average of the two numbers. More details further down under 'aggregation
operators'.

#### Dimensões de agregação { #dimensions-of-aggregation } 

##### Unidades e níveis organizacionais { #organisational-units-and-levels } 

Organisational units are used to represent the 'where' dimension
associated with data values. In DHIS2, organisational units are arranged
in a hierarchy, which typically corresponds to the hierarchical nature
of the organisation or country. Organisational unit levels correspond to
the distinct levels within the hierarchy. For instance, a country may be
organized into provinces, then districts, then facilities, and then
sub-centres. This organisational hierarchy would have five levels.
Within each level, a number of organisational units would exist. During
the aggregation process, data is aggregated from the lower
organisational unit levels to higher levels. Depending on the
aggregation operator, data may be 'summed' or 'averaged' within a given
organisational unit level, to derive the aggregate total for all the
organisational units that are contained within a higher level
organisational unit level. For instance, if there are ten districts
contained in a province and the aggregation operator for a given data
element has been defined as 'SUM', the aggregate total for the province
would be calculated as the sum of the values of the individual ten
districts contained in that province.

##### Período { #period } 

Periods are used to represent the 'when' dimension associated with data
values. Data can easily be aggregated from weeks to months, from months
to quarters, and from quarters to years. DHIS2 uses known rules of how
these different intervals are contained within other intervals (for
instance Quarter 1 2010 is known to contain January 2010, February 2010
an March 2010) in order to aggregate data from smaller time intervals,
e.g. weeks, into longer time intervals, e.g. months.

##### Elementos e categorias de dados { #data-elements-and-categories } 

The data element dimension specifies 'what' is being recorded by a
particular data value. Data element categories are actually degenerated
dimensions of the data element dimension, and are used to disaggregate
the data element dimension into finer categories. Data element
categories, such as 'Age' and 'Gender', are used to record a particular
data element, typically for different population groups. These
categories can then be used to calculate the overall total for the
category and the total of all categories.

#### Operadores de agregação, métodos de agregação { #aggregation-operators-methods-for-aggregation } 

##### Soma { #sum } 

The 'sum' operator simply calculates the sum of all data values that are
contained within a particular aggregation matrix. For instance, if data
is recorded on a monthly basis at the district level and is aggregated
to provincial quarterly totals, all data contained in all districts for
a given province and all weeks for the given quarter will be added
together to obtain the aggregate total.

##### Média { #average } 

When the average aggregation operator is selected, the unweighted
average of all data values within a given aggregation matrix are
calculated.

It is important to understand how DHIS2 treats null values in the
context of the average operator. It is fairly common for some
organisational units not to submit data for certain data elements. In
the context of the average operator, the average results from the number
of data elements that are actually present (therefore NOT NULL) within a
given aggregation matrix. If there are 12 districts within a given
province, but only 10 of these have submitted data, the average
aggregate will result from these ten values that are actually present in
the database, and will not take into account the missing values.

#### Configurações de agregação avançadas (níveis de agregação) { #advanced-aggregation-settings-aggregation-levels } 

##### Níveis de agregação { #aggregation-levels } 

The normal rule of the system is to aggregate all raw data together when
moving up the organisational hierarchy, and the system assumes that data
entry is not being duplicated by entering the same services provided to
the same clients at both facility level and also entering an
'aggregated' (sum of all facilities) number at a higher level. This is
to more easily facilitate aggregation when the same services are
provided but to different clients/catchment populations at facilities on
level 5 and a PHC (the parent of the same facilities) at level 4. In
this way a facility at level 5 and a PHC at level 4 can share the same
data elements and simply add together their numbers to provide the total
of services provided in the geographical area.

Sometimes such an aggregation is not desired, simply because it would
mean duplicating data about the same population. This is the case when
you have two different sources of data for two different orgunit levels.
E.g. catchment population for facilities can come from a different
source than district populations and therefore the sum of the facility
catchment populations do not match the district population provided by
e.g. census data. If this is the case we would actually want duplicated
data in the system so that each level can have as accurate numbers as
possible, but then we do NOT want to aggregate these data sources
together.

In the Data Element section you can edit data elements and for each of
them specify how aggregation is done for each level. In the case
described above we need to tell the system NOT to include facility data
on population in any of the aggregations above that level, as the level
above, in this case the districts have registered their population
directly as raw data. The district population data should then be used
at all levels above and including the district level, while facility
level should use its own data.

##### Como editar a agregação do elemento de dados { #how-to-edit-data-element-aggregation } 

This is controlled through something called aggregation levels and at
the end of the edit data element screen there is a tick-box called
Aggregation Levels. If you tick that one you will see a list of
aggregation levels, available and selected. Default is to have no
aggregation levels defined, then all raw data in the hierarchy will be
added together. To specify the rule described above, and given a
hierarchy of Country, Province, District, Facility: select Facility and
District as your aggregation levels. Basically you select where you have
data. Selecting Facility means that Facilities will use data from
facilities (given since this is the lowest level). Selecting District
means that the District level raw data will be used when aggregating
data for District level (hence no aggregation will take place at that
level), and the facility data will not be part of the aggregated
District values. When aggregating data at Province level the District
level raw data will be used since this is the highest available
aggregation level selected. Also for Country level aggregates the
District raw data will be used. Just to repeat, if we had not specified
that District level was an aggregation level, then the facility data and
district data would have been added together and caused duplicate
(double) population data for districts and all levels above.

### Tabelas de recursos { #resource-tables } 

Resource tables provide additional information about the dimensions of
the data in a format that is well suited for external tools to combine
with the data value table. By joining the data value table with these
resource tables one can easily aggregate along the data element category
dimension or data element/indicator/organisation unit groups dimensions.
E.g. by tagging all the data values with the category option male or
female and provide this in a separate column 'gender' one can get
subtotals of male and female based on data values that are collected for
category option combinations like (male, \<5) and (male,\>5). See the
Pivot Tables section for more examples of how these can be used.
orgunitstructure is another important table in the database that helps
to provide the hierarchy of orgunits together with the data. By joining
the orgunitstructure table with the data values table you can get rows
of data values with the full hierarchy, e.g. on the form: OU1, OU2, OU3,
OU4, DataElement, Period, Value (Sierra Leone, Bo, Badija, Ngelehun CHC,
BCG \<1, Jan-10, 32) This format makes it much easier for e.g. pivot
tables or other OLAP tools to aggregate data up the hierarchy.

### Tabelas de relatório { #reportTable } 

Report tables are defined, cross-tabulated reports which can be used as
the basis of further reports, such as Excel Pivot Tables or simply
downloaded as an Excel sheet. Report tables are intended to provide a
specific view of data which is required, such as "Monthly National ANC
Indicators". This report table might provide all ANC indicators for a
country, aggregated by month for the entire country. This data could of
course be retrieved from the main datamart, but report tables generally
perform faster and present well defined views of data to users.

## Como criar tabelas de relatório { #reporting_creating_tables } 

To create a new report table, go to the Report tables section of the
Reports module (Reports -\> Report Table). Above the list of standard
reports, use the "Add report table" or "Add Dataelement Dimension Table"
buttons. A regular report table can be used to hold data on data
elements, indicators or dataset completeness, while Dataelement
dimension tables are used to include data element categories in report
tables. Creating the tables are done in the same way, however, the only
exception being when choosing data.

To create a report table, you start by making some general choices for
the table, the most important of which is the crosstab dimension. Then,
you choose which data elements, indicators, datasets or data element
dimensions you want to include. Finally you select which organisation
units and time periods to use in the report table. Each of these steps
are described in detail below.

### Opções gerais { #reporting_general_options } 


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/general_options.jpg)

** Dimensões da guia cruzada **

You can cross-tab one or more of the following dimensions: data
element/indicator, orgunit, and period, which means that columns will be
created based on the values of the dimensions chosen, e.g. if indicators
is selected you will get column names in the table reflecting the names
of the selected indicators.

For example, if you cross-tab on indicators and periods, the column
headers will say "\<indicator title\> \<period\>". The organisation
units will be listed as rows. See screenshot for clarification:

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/crosstab_ind-per.jpg)

If you cross-tab on indicators and organisation units, the column
headers of the table will say "\<indicator title\> \<organisation
unit\>". Now the periods will be listed as rows. See screenshot for
clarification:

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/crosstab_ind-org.jpg)

Note that the options made here regarding crosstab dimensions may have
consequences for what options are available when using the report table
as a data source later, for example for standard reports.

**Ordem de classificação**

Affects the rightmost column in the table, allows you to choose to sort
it low to high or high to low.

** Limite superior **

Top limit allow you to set a maximum number of rows you want to include
in the report table.

** Incluir regressão **

This adds additional columns with regression values that can be included
in the report design, e.g. in line charts.

### Seleção de dados { #reporting_selecting_data } 


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/select_data.jpg)

** Indicadores / elementos de dados **

Here you select the data elements/indicators that you want to include in
the report. Use the group filter to more easily find what you are
looking for and double click on the items you want to include, or use
the buttons to add/remove elements. You can have both data elements and
indicators in the same report.

** Conjuntos de dados **

Here you select the data sets that you want to include in the report.
Including a data set will give you data on the data completeness of the
given set, not data on its data elements. Double click on the items you
want to include, or use the buttons.

### Seleção de parâmetros de relatório { #selecting_reporting_params } 


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/relative_options.jpg)

There are two ways to select both what organisation units to include in
a report, and what time periods should be included: relative, or fixed.
Fixed organisation units and/or periods means that you select the
units/periods to include in the report table when you create the report
table. Using relative periods, you can select the time and/or units as
parameters when the report table is populated, for example when running
a standard report or creating a chart. A combination is also possible,
for example to add some organisation units in the report permanently
while letting the users choose additional. Report parameters is
discussed below. In general, using fixed organisation units and/or time
periods are an unnecessary restriction.

** Unidades de organização fixas **

To add fixed organisation units, click "Toggle fixed organisation
units". A panel will appear where you can choose orgunits to always
include in the report. If you leave it blank, the users select orgunits
when running the report through the use of report parameters. Use the
drop down menu to filter organisation units by level, double click or
use the buttons to add/remove.

** Períodos fixos **

To add fixed periods, click "Toggle fixed organisation units". A panel
will appear where you can choose periods to always include in the
report. If you leave it blank, the users select periods when running the
report through the use of report parameters. Use the drop down menu to
choose period type (week, month, etc), the Prev and Next button to
choose year, and double click or use the buttons to add/remove.

** Períodos relativos **

Instead of using fixed/static periods like 'Jan-2010' or 'Q1-2010', more
generic periods can be used to create reusable report tables, e.g. for
monthly reports the period 'Reporting month' will simply pick the
current reporting month selected by the user when running the report.
Note that all relative periods are relative to a "reporting month". The
reporting month is either selected by the users, otherwise the current
month is used. Here is a description of the possible relative periods:

  - *Reporting month:*

    Use this for monthly reports. The month selected in the reporting
    month parameter will be used in the report.

  - *Months/Quarters this year*:

    This will provide one value per month or quarter in the year. This
    is well suited for standard monthly or quarterly reports where all
    month/quarters need to be listed. Periods that still have no data
    will be empty, but will always keep the same column name.

  - *This year:*

    This is the cumulative so far in the year, aggregating the periods
    from the beginning of the year up to and including the selected
    reporting month.

  - *Months/Quarters last year*:

    This will provide one value per month or quarter last year, relative
    to the reporting month. This is well suited for standard monthly or
    quarterly reports where all month/quarters need to be listed.
    Periods that still have no data will be empty, but will always keep
    the same column name.

  - *Last year:*

    This is the cumulative last year, relative to the reporting month,
    aggregating all the periods from last year.

** Exemplo - períodos relativos **

Let's say we have chosen three indicators: A, B and C, and we have also
chosen to use the relative periods 'Reporting month' and 'This year'
when we created the report table. If the reporting month (selected
automatically or by the user) is for example May 2010, the report table
will calculate the values for the three selected indicators for May 2010
(= the 'Reporting month') and the accumulated values for the three
selected indicators so far in 2010 (= so far 'This year').

Thus, we will end up with six values for each of the organisation units:
"Indicator A May 2010", "Indicator B May 2010" "Indicator C May 2010",
"Indicator A so far in 2010", "Indicator B so far in 2010" and
"Indicator C so far in 2010".

** Parâmetros de relatório **

Report parameters make the reports more generic and reusable over time
and for different organisation units. These parameters will pop up when
generating the report table or running a report based on the report
table. The users will select what they want to see in the report. There
are four possible report parameters, and you can select none, all, or
any combination.

  - *Reporting month:*

    This decides which month will be used when the system is choosing
    the relative periods. If the box it not checked, the user will not
    be asked for the reporting month when the report is generated - the
    current month will then be used.

  - *Grand parent organisation unit:*

    Select the grand parent of all the orgunit children and grand
    children you want listed in the report. E.g. a selected region will
    trigger the use of the region itself, all its district, and all
    their sub-districts.

  - *Parent organisation unit:*

    Select the parent of all the orgunit children you want listed in the
    report. E.g. a selected district will trigger the use of the
    district itself and all its children/sub-districts.

  - *Organisation unit:*

    This triggers the use of this orgunit in the report. No children are
    listed.

** Exemplo - parâmetros de relatório **

Continuing with the example on relative periods just above, let's say
that in addition to 'Reporting month', we have chosen 'Parent
organisation unit' as a report parameter when we created the report
table. When we're running the report table, we will be asked to select
an organisation unit. Now, let's say we choose "Region R" as the
organisation unit. "Region R" has the children "District X" and
"District Y".

When the report is run, the system will aggregate data for both
"District X" and "District Y". The data will be aggregated from the
lowest level where they have been collected. The values for the
districts will be aggregated further to give an aggregated value for
"Region R".

Thus, the report table will generate the six values presented in the
previous example, for "District X", "District Y" and "Region R".

### Tabelas de dimensão de elemento de dados { #reporting_de_dimension_tables } 

These tables enable the use of data element categories in report tables.
There are two differences from regular report tables. The first is that
it is not possible to select crosstab dimensions, as the columns will
always be the disaggregations from the category combinations. The other
is the actual choice of data. Only one category combination can be added
per report, and only data elements from the same category combo can be
selected.

Subtotals and the total will also be included in the table, e.g. a
gender (male, female) + EPI age(\<1, \>1) category combo would give the
following columns: male+\<1, male+\>1, Female+\<1, female+\>1, male,
female,\<1, \>1, total.

** Seleção de dados **


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/catcombo.jpg)

Use the drop down menu to choose category combinations. The data
elements using this category combination will be listed. Double click to
add to the report, or use the buttons.

### Tabela de relatório - melhores práticas { #reporting_best_practices } 

To make the report tables reusable over time and across orgunits they
can have parameters. Four types of parameters are allowed; orgunit,
parent orgunit (for listing of orgunits in one area), grand parent
orgunit and reporting month. As a side note it can be mentioned that we
are looking into expanding this to include reporting quarter and year,
or to make that period parameter more generic with regard to period type
somehow. The ability to use period as a parameter makes the report table
reusable over time and as such fits nicely with report needs such as
monthly, quarterly or annual reports. When a report is run by the user
in DHIS2, the user must specify the values for the report tables that
are linked to the report. First the report table is re-generated
(deleted and re-created with updated data), and then the report is run
(in the background, in Jasper report engine).

Report tables can consist of values related to data elements, indicators
or data completeness, which is related to completeness of reporting
across orgunits for a given month. Completeness reports will be covered
in a separate section.

There are three dimensions in a report table that identify the data;
indicators or data elements, orgunits and periods. For each of these
dimensions the user can select which metadata values to include in the
report. The user must select one or more data elements or indicators to
appear in the report. The orgunit selection can be substituted with a
parameter, either one specific orgunit or an orgunit parent (making
itself and all its children appear in the report). If one or more
orgunits are selected and no orgunit parameter is used, then the report
is static with regard to which orgunits to include, which in most cases
is an unnecessary restriction to a report.

** Usando períodos relativos **

The period selection is more advanced as it can in addition to specific
periods like Jan-09, Q1-08, 2007 also contain what is called relative
periods. As report usually is run routinely over time a specific period
like Jan-09 is not very useful in a report. Instead, if you want to
design a monthly report, you should use the relative period called
Reporting Month. Then you must also include Reporting Month as one of
your report parameters to let the system know what exactly is the
Reporting Month on the time of report generation. There are many other
relative periods available, and they all relate to the report parameter
Reporting Month. E.g. the relative period called So far this year refers
to the accumulative value for the year incl. the Reporting Month. If you
want a trend report with multiple periods in stead of one aggregated
period, you can select e.g. 'Months this year', which would give you
values for each month so far in the year. You can do a similar report
with quarters. The idea is to support as many generic report types as
possible using relative periods, so if you have other report needs,
please suggest new relative periods on the mailing list, and they might
be added to the report table options.

** Dimensões de tabulação cruzada **

Cross tabbing is a very powerful functionality in report design, as the
typical DHIS2 data table with references to period, data
element/indicator and orgunit makes more advanced report design very
difficult, as you cannot put e.g. specific indicators, periods or
orgunits on specific columns. E.g. by cross-tabbing on the indicator
dimension in an indicator report table you will get the indicator names
on the column headers in your report, in addition to a column
referencing orgunit, and another column referencing period. With such a
table design you could drag and drop indicator names to specific columns
or chart positions in the iReport software. Similarly you can cross tab
on orgunits or periods to make their names specifically available to
report design. E.g. by cross-tabbing on periods and selecting the two
relative periods 'Reporting month' and 'This year', you can design
reports with both the last month and the accumulative annual value for
given month as they will be available as column headers in your report
table. It is also possible to combine two dimensions in cross-tabbing,
e.g. period and indicator, which makes it possible to e.g. look at three
selected indicators for two specific relative periods. This would e.g.
make it possible to make a table or chart based report with BCG, DPT3
and Measles coverage, both for the last month and the accumulative
coverage so far in the year.

All in all, by combining the functionality of cross tabbing, relative
periods and report table parameters you should have a tool to support
most report scenarios. If not, we would be very happy to receive
suggestions to further improvements to report tables. As already
mentioned, we have started to look at more fine-grained parameters for
the period dimension as the 'Reporting month' does not cover enough, or
at least is not intuitive enough, when it comes to e.g. quarterly
reports.

## Resultados da tabela de relatório { #reporting_table_outcomes } 

When the report table is run, the system will calculate values for
specified indicators/data elements/data sets, orgunits and periods. The
data will be presented in DHIS2 in a table layout. The column headers
will correspond to the cross-tab dimension you have selected. An example
report table showing ANC coverage for a district in The Gambia, is shown
below. Here the indicator and the periods are cross-tabbed, as can be
seen from the column headers.


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/crosstab_ind-per.jpg)

Above the table there are six buttons; five download buttons and one
Back button. Clicking the Back button will simply take you back to the
previous screen. The function of the five download buttons, are
presented below the screenshot:

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/report-table_output.png)

** Os cinco botões de download **

  - *Download as Excel:*

    Faz o download de um arquivo Excel gerado que você pode abrir no Excel.

  - *Download as CSV:*

    Downloads a generated .csv file. CSV stands for **C**omma
    **S**eparated **V**alues. It's a text file with the file ending
    .csv. Each line in the file corresponds to a row in the table, while
    the columns are separated with semi colons (;). The file can be
    opened in a text editor as well as in a spread sheet program (such
    as Excel).

  - *Download as PDF:*

    Downloads a generated PDF file. The data will be presented in a
    similar layout as the generated table you are already viewing in
    DHIS2.

  - *Download as Report:*

    Downloads a "styled" PDF file. In addition to present the data in a
    table layout, this file also presents a chart, showing the
    aggregated data from all the chosen periods and the parent
    organisation unit chosen for the report table. The report is
    generated using the Jasper report engine.

  - *Download as JRXML:*

    Downloads the design file for the generated Report described in the
    previous bullet. The design file (with the file ending .jrxml) can
    be opened in the Jasper iReport Designer software. If you plan to
    design standard reports, this is the starting point.

## Relatórios padrão { #reporting_standard_reports } 

### O que é um relatório padrão? { #what-is-a-standard-report } 

A standard report is a manually designed report that presents data in a
manually specified layout. Standard reports can be based either on
report tables or SQL queries. Both approaches are described in the
following sections. The main advantage of using report tables is that of
simplicity - no special development skills are required. In cases where
you have special requirements or need to utilize additional parts of the
DHIS2 database you might want to use a SQL based standard report. In any
case you will be able to utilize report parameters in order to create
dynamic reports. The following guide will use the report table approach,
while the SQL approach is covered towards the end.

### Criação de relatórios padrão no iReport { #designing-standard-reports-in-ireport } 

Jasper iReport Designer is a tool for creating reports that can be used
as Standard Reports in DHIS2. The tool allows for the creation of
standard report templates that can easily be exported from DHIS2 with up
to date data. The process of creating reports involves four major steps:

1.  A report table must be created in DHIS2 with the indicators/data
    elements/datasets to be used in the report.

2.  You have to run the report table and download the design file (Click
    the "Download as JRXML" button).

3.  Open the downloaded .jrxml file using the free software Jasper
    iReport Designer to edit the layout of the report.

4.  The edited report can then be uploaded to DHIS2 to be used as a
    standard report.

If you want to preview your report during the design in iReport, you
actually have to upload your file to DHIS2 to see how it looks.

These four steps will be describe in detail in the coming sections. In
general, when you are making standard reports you should have a clear
idea of how it should look before you even make the report table, as how
the report table is designed has implications for how the report can be
formatted in iReport. For example, what crosstab dimensions are selected
in the report table has consequences for what crosstabs are available
for the standard report, and it has consequences for what types of
charts you can make.

#### Baixe e abra o arquivo de design { #download-and-open-the-design-file } 

> **NOTE**
>
> If you have not created a report table yet, you have to do so.
> See section "How to create report tables" to do so.*

Locate your desired report table and run it by clicking the green circle
with a white arrow inside. When the report is shown, click the "Download
as JRXML" button to download the design file. Then open that file in the
Jasper iReport Designer software.

#### Editando o relatório { #editing-the-report } 

You are now ready to edit the layout of the report. The main iReport
window consists of a "Report Inspector" to the left, the report document
in the middle, a "Palette" area on the upper right hand side and a
"Properties" area on the lower right hand side. The "Report Inspector"
are used for selecting and examining the various properties of the
report, and when selecting an item in the inspector, the "Properties"
panel changes to display properties relating to the selection. The
"Palette" is used for adding various elements, e.g. text boxes, images
and charts to the
document.


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireport/iReport-window.png)

> **NOTE**
>
> If you cannot see the Palette or Properties sidebar, you can
> enable them from the menu item called "Window" on the menu bar.

The iReport document is divided into seven main bands, divided by layout
separators (the blue lines). These lines are used to decide how big each
of the areas should be on the report.

Todas as áreas têm finalidades diferentes:

  - Título - área para o título do relatório

  - Cabeçalho da página - área para o cabeçalho da página

  - Cabeçalho da coluna - área para cabeçalhos de coluna (para a tabela)

  - Detalhe 1 - área onde os dados reais do relatório serão colocados

  - Rodapé da coluna - área para fazer rodapé da tabela

  - Rodapé da página - área para o rodapé da página

  - Summary - elements in this area will be placed at the end of the
    report

By default you will see that only the Title, Column Header and the
Detail 1 bands have data. For most reports this is OK. The Title band is
suitable for a title and e.g. a chart. Data fields entered into the
Detail 1 area will be iterated over to create a table. For example, if a
field called "dataelementname" is placed in the Detail 1 band, all data
elements in the report table will be listed here. We'll come back to
data fields management just a little below.

The unused bands in the report are contracted to add more space for your
report data. You can however increase/decrease the band height as you
like. There are two ways to do that. The first way is simply to drag the
blue band-line as shown below.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireport/17_drag.jpg)

The other way to adjust the band height is to select a band in the
"Report Inspector", and then adjust the "Band height" value in the
"Detail 1 - properties" area in the lower right corner.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireport/18_adjust.jpg)

As the fields are already present on the report, you probably don't want
to do anything than just fix the layout and drag fields around. You can
also resize the fields by dragging the side, top or bottom lines. If you
want to change the text in the column headers, you simply double click
the field and change the text.

To add the a field to the table, we simply drag it to the Detail 1 band
from the "Report Inspector". The column header will be added
automatically.

By double clicking the box, the text can be edited. The format of the
text, such as size, font and alignment, can be adjusted with the tools
above the document.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireport/21_title_edit.jpg)

> **NOTE**
>
> Fields starting with "$F" present values that are
> retrieved from the database every time the report is run. The values
> here will vary, so do not change these fields unless you want a static
> value here!

#### Texto { #text } 

There are two types of text in iReport: «Text labels» and «Text fields»
(data fields). They work in different ways, and should be used for
different purposes. The main point is that text fields are just
placeholders that will be filled with the correct text from the report
table when the report is run, while text labels will stay the way they
are when the report is run.

##### Texto estático { #static-text } 

Static text are text plain text labels that can be edited normally.
There are two ways to edit text labels:

  - Ao clicar duas vezes na caixa de texto

  - By using the Static text properties in the Properties
panel


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_01.jpg)

##### Campos de texto { #text-fields } 

Text fields are formulas that will be filled from the report table when
the report is run. Unlike static text, these can not be edited in a
normal way. However, they can be manipulated in various ways to ensure
that the desired output will be produced. There are three ways to edit
the text fields:

  - Ao clicar com o botão direito na caixa de texto e selecionar Editar expressão

  - By double clicking the text field (not recommended, as this will not
    bring up the expression editor)

  - By using the Text field properties in the Properties
panel


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_04.jpg)

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_06.jpg)

Text fields can represent either numbers or text, so that they can be
used both for showing for example names of district or for numeric
values. It is therefore important the Expression class, seen in the Text
field properties matches the Text field expression. For the default text
fields in the .jrxml file downloaded from DHIS2 this is not a problem,
but it is important when making new text fields. The two most important
Expression classes are java.lang.Double for numbers and java.lang.String
for text.

###### Exemplo { #example } 

For example, let us say you have a quarterly report where you would like
to add a new column with the yearly total. You therefore add a new
Static text field to the column header band, and a Text field to the
details band in. By default, new Text fields are set to java.lang.String
(text). However, the yearly total column will be filled with numbers. We
therefore have to change the Expression class for the new text field to
java.lang.Double:

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_07.jpg)

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_08.jpg)

When we edit the text field expression, we see the Expression editor
window with all the available columns from the report table. We can see
here that each of these are marked with what type they are - text or
number. What we need to make sure of is therefore that the expression
class we choose for the text field matches the actual
expression.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_10.jpg)

### Filtrando as linhas da tabela { #filtering-the-table-rows } 

In the default table exported from DHIS2, there are some rows that it
might be better to leave out of the table, and some that it would be
preferable to have at the end. For example, when making a table based on
a report table with the «parent organisation unit» parameter, the
default table might have a row with the national level somewhere in
between all the regions. In iReport, this can be changed so that the
«parent organisation unit» appears at the bottom of the table. This
involves two steps that will be explained below. Note that this will not
work where there is only one organisation units, and it is therefore
most useful when using the «parent organisation unit» or «grand parent
organisation unit» parameters in the report table.

#### Escondendo a «unidade de organização de parâmetros» da tabela { #hiding-the-parameter-organisation-unit-from-the-table } 

We exclude the "parameter organisation unit" from the table by using a
property in the Details band called "Print when expression". To set a
Print when expression, start by selecting the Detail band in the Report
inspector, then edit the Print when expression in the properties
panel.


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_11.jpg)

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_12.jpg)

The Expression editor window should now appear. What we must do is to
create an expression that checks if the row being generated is the row
with the organisation unit given as a parameter. The report table
contains a column that we can use for this called
organisation\_unit\_is\_parent. To exclude the row with the parameter
organisation unit, double click on organisation\_unit\_is\_parent in the
list to copy it to the expression area, then add `.equals("No")` at the
end so that the code is:

`` `
$ F {organisation_unit_is_parent} .equals ("Não")
`` `

This tells the report engine to only print table rows where the
organisation unit is not the parent organisation
unit.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_14.jpg)

#### Colocar a "unidade de organização param" na parte inferior da mesa { #putting-the-param-organisation-unit-at-the-bottom-of-the-table } 

Instead of removing the "param organisation unit" from the table
entirely, it is also possible to put it at the bottom (or top) of the
table. This is done by using the sort functionality explained in the
next section, and choosing to sort first by
"organisation\_unit\_is\_parent". Other sorting options can be added in
addition to this, for example to make a list where the param
organisation unit is at the bottom of the table, with the other
organisation units listed alphabetically above it.

#### Escondendo outras linhas { #hiding-other-rows } 

Using the expression editor it is also possible to exclude other rows
from the table, in addition to the parent organisation unit as was
explained above. In Ghana, for example, all regions have a «fake
district» which is the name of the region in square brackets. This can
also be excluded from the table using the Print when expression that was
introduced above. To to this, follow the instructions above to bring up
the Expression editor window. Then, we use Java expressions to test
whether or not the row should be hidden.

##### Exemplo - remoção de linhas com unidades de organização começando com \ [ { #example-removing-rows-with-organisation-units-starting-with } 

Exemplo - remoção de linhas com unidades de organização começando com \ [

`` `
($ F {organisationunitname} .charAt (0)! = '[')
`` `

This makes the report skip any rows where the first character of the
organisation unit name is \[.

It is also possible to combine several of these expressions. To do this
we put the expressions in a parenthesis with the two characters && in
between. For example, to make a table that leaves both organisation
units whose name starts with \[ and the parent organisation unit, we can
use the following expression:

`` `
($ F {organisationunitname} .charAt (0)! = '[') && $ F {organisation_unit_is_parent} .equals ("Não")
`` `


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_29.jpg)

### Ordenação { #sorting } 

Often you will be making reports where the first column is organisation
unit names. However, it can be a problem that the list of organisation
units are not sorted alphabetically. This can be fixed in iReport
through a few simple steps.

In the report inspector, right click on the name of the report (by
default this is dpt) and select Edit
query.


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_21.jpg)

A Report query window will appear. Click on the Sort options
button.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_22.jpg)

A Sorting window as show below will appear. Here, we can add our sorting
options. Click the Add field button. Another small window will show up,
with a drop down menu where you can choose Sort by organisationunitname
to have the table sorted alphabetically by
name.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_23.jpg)

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_24.jpg)

Click OK - Close - OK to close the three windows. The table should now
be sorted.

### Alterando nomes de elementos de indicador / dados { #changing-indicatordata-element-names } 

By default, the reports from DHIS2 uses the short names for indicators
and data elements in reports and charts. In some cases these are not
always very meaningful for third parties, but with some work they can be
given custom names through iReport. This is useful for example if you
are making a report with indicators as rows and periods as column, or
for charts with
indicators.


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_000.jpg)

To change the names of an indicator or data element, we have to edit its
«expression» or formula, for example by right clicking the text box and
choosing Edit expression to bring up the Expression
editor.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_32.jpg)

Next, we have to insert some Java code. In the following example, we
will be replacing the shortname of three indicators with their proper
names. The code searches for the shortname, and then replaces it with a
proper name.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_34.jpg)

`` `
($ F {indicatorname} .equals ("Bed Util All"))? "Utilização da cama - todas as enfermarias"
:
($ F {indicatorname} .equals ("Bed Util Mat"))? “Utilização da Cama - Maternidade”
:
($ F {indicatorname} .equals ("Bed Util Ped"))? "Utilização da Cama - Pediátrica"
:
$ F {indicatorname}
`` `

A partir disso, podemos ver um padrão que é reutilizável para casos mais gerais.

  - For each indicator or data element we want to change the name for,
    we need one line

  - Cada linha é separada por dois pontos:

  - Terminamos a expressão com uma linha «regular»

Each line has the same format, where the red text is the shortname, the
blue text is what we want to insert
instead.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/ireport_screen_0.jpg)

The same expressions can be used for example when having indicator names
along the category axis of a chart.

### Adicionando totais horizontais { #adding-horizontal-totals } 

By using the expression editor, it is possible to add a column to the
table with totals for each row. In the following example, we will make a
table with three months as columns as well as a column with the totals
for the three months.

We start by dragging a text label into the table header and changing its
text to "Total", and dragging a text field into the details row.

As was discussed in the section on "Text field", we have to change the
properties of the new text field so that it can display numbers. To do
this, change the "Expressions Class" in the properties panel to
"java.lang.Double".

Right click the text field and choose "Edit Expression". This will bring
up the "Expressions editor". As the expression, we want to sum up all
the columns. In this case we have three value expressions we want to sum
up: "September", "October 2010", "November 2010". The name of these
fields will vary depending on the crosstab dimension you have chosen in
the report table. In our case, the expression we make is
`` `
$ f {setembro} + $ f {outubro 2010} + $ f {novembro 2010}
`` `
Cada linha da tabela terá uma coluna de totais à direita.

### Grupos de mesas { #groups-of-tables } 

There are cases when it can be useful to have several tables in one
report. This can be done using Report groups. Using this functionality,
one can for example create a report one table for each indicator, or one
table of each organisation unit. In the following, we will go through
the steps needed to make a report with three indicators, each
represented in one table. It is important that the report table does not
crosstab on indicators when we want to make groups of tables based on
indicators.

In our example, the .jrxml file downloaded from DHIS2 will by default
have one column for organisation unit and on for indicators (assuming we
have chosen periods as the only crosstab dimension). We start by
removing the indicator column, since this in not needed in our case, and
realign the other fields to fit the
report.


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_36.jpg)

Next, we create out Report group. Go to the report inspector, right
click on the report name (dpt is the default) and choose Add Report
Group.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_38.jpg)

A window will appear, with a report group wizard. Select a name for the
group, in this case we choose «Indicator». In the drop down menu, we can
select what columns in the report table we want the groups to be based
on. So, if we wanted one table for each organisation unit, we would
choose organisation unit name as the report object to group according
to. However, since we are grouping by indicators in this example, we
choose indicatorname. Then click
next.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_39.jpg)

The next step is to select whether or not we want a separate Group
header and Group footer band for each report group. In this case, we
choose to include both. Click Finish, and the group bands should appear
in the
report.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_40.jpg)

If you upload and run the report, it will now create one table for each
indicator. However, it will not look very good as there will be no
header row over each table - only one header at the top of each page.
Also, there is no indication as to which table is showing which
indicator. In the following, we will fix this.

Instead of having the title row in the column header, we can instead
move it to the Group header. This will make the heading show up above
each individual table. Furthermore, we can add a heading to each table
with the name of the indicator.

Move the column headers from the Column header band to the Indicator
group header
band.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_41.jpg)

Next, add a text field to the Indicator group heading band, and edit
it’s expression to display the indicator
name.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_42.jpg)

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_44.jpg)

The report should now have three tables, one for each indicator. Each
table will have a heading with the name of the indicator, and also a
table header
row.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_45.jpg)

#### Classificação e agrupamento { #sorting-and-grouping } 

When using grouping, some precautions must be taken with regards to
sorting. Notably, when adding sorting parameters, whatever parameter is
used as basis for the grouping must come first. Thus if you are grouping
the report by indicator, and want sort the organisation units
alphabetically, you have to choose to sort first by indicator, then by
organisation unit name as shown below. For instructions on how to add
sorting, see the sorting section
above.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_59.jpg)

## Gráficos { #charts } 

By default, a 3D bar chart is included in the .jrxml file that is
downloaded from DHIS 2. This is set up so that only data from the
«parameter organisation unit» (often the parent or grand parent) is
used. Usually, this is a good solution. Since it is the default, we will
start by looking at bar charts, before looking at line
charts.

### Gráficos de barra { #bar-charts } 


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_54.jpg)

Bar charts are the default chart type in DHIS2. In this section, we will
look at how to make a bar charts like the one above, comparing the value
of one indicator in several districts. To edit the default chart in
iReport, right click on it and choose Chart
data.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_46.jpg)

A window will appear. By default, the Filter expression is filled in so
that only data for the parent organisation unit will be displayed. If
for some reason you do not want this, simply delete the text in the text
box. In this case we do NOT want the filter, as we are making a chart
showing a comparison across districts. To continue, click the details
tab.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_47.jpg)

Under details, you see the list of series for the chart. By default, one
series is created per crosstab column. In this case, we are looking at
data for one indicator for the whole of 2010, for a number of districts.
The indicator is along the crosstab
dimension.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_48.jpg)

To make changes to a series, select it and click modify. Another window
will appear where there are four areas that can be edit. The three first
are required, but it is sufficient to add an empty quote («») in one of
the first
two.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_500.jpg)

The first box is a text field where the name of the series can be
inserted or edited. This is the field that will be used to fill the text
in the legend box (shown
below).

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_50.jpg)

However, if you want to have the name of each bar along the x-axis of
the chart instead of using the legend, this can be done by adding
whatever text you want to present in the Category expression field, or
by inserting an expression to have it filled automatically when the
report is run. In this case, we want to have one bar for each
organisation unit. We therefore edit the category expression by clicking
on the button to the
right.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_49.jpg)

As the expression, we chose organisationunitname, as shown
below.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_490.jpg)

When we are finished, the series editor should look like below. Click
OK, then Close to close the Chart Details
window.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_501.jpg)

If you add a good description in the Category expression area, you can
leave out the legend box. This is done in the Report properties panel of
iReport, where you can also edit many other details of the
chart.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_51.jpg)

We can also add a title to the chart, for example the name of the
indicator. This is also done in the Chart properties panel, under Title
expression.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_55.jpg)

The Expression editor window will appear, where you can enter the title.
Note that the title must be in quotes, as shown
below.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_56.jpg)

O gráfico agora está pronto.

### Gráficos de linha { #line-charts } 

Line charts can be useful in many circumstances. However, to make line
charts the report data (report table) must be suited for it. Thus if you
want to make a line chart, it is important that the report table does
not have periods in the crosstab dimension. Examples where this is
useful is if you are making a report for a single organisation unit with
one or more indicators, or if you are making a report with one indicator
and one or more organisation units.

Below, we will go though the steps needed to make a report with a line
chart showing the development of three indicators over one year, for one
organisation unit. We start by making a report table with the choices
shown
below:


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_57.jpg)

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_60.jpg)

When we open the resulting .jrxml-file in iReport, the default line
chart is included. Since we want to make a line chart, we delete this
chart and drag a new chart element into the report from the Palette
panel.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_61.jpg)

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_62.jpg)

As soon as we drag the Chart element into the report, a window will
appear. We choose the Line chart, as shown
below.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_63.jpg)

A chart wizard will appear. Click next in the first step, then Finish in
the next - we will add the data
later.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_64.jpg)

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_65.jpg)

Next, adjust the size and position of the chart in your report. Then, we
will add one data series for each of our three indicators. Right-click
on the chart and choose Chart data. If you are making a chart with one
indicator and several organisation units, you probably want to make a
filter expression so that only data from the parameter/parent
organisation unit is used in the chart. To do this, add this line to the
Filter expression area:

`$ F {organisation_unit_is_parent} .equals (" Sim ")`

In our example, we only have on organisation unit, so this is not
necessary. Next, click the details tab to see a list of the series in
the chart. For now, this list is empty, but we will add one series for
each of our three indicators. To add a series, click the Add
button.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_66.jpg)

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_67.jpg)

In the window that appears, enter the name of the first of the
indicators in the Series expression window. Remember to put the name in
quotes. In the category expression (along the x-axis) we want the
months, so we use the button next to the field to open the Expression
editor and add
periodname.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_69.jpg)

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_68.jpg)

In the value expression, we add the actual data values for our first
indicator. Use the Expression editor again to do this. When we are
finished, the window should look like the one below, only with different
names according to the
indicator.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_70.jpg)

You can then Click OK to close the window. Follow the same steps to add
a series for the other
indicators.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_71.jpg)

Close the window, and the data for the line chart should be ready.
However, some additional adjustments might be needed - most of these can
be found in the Line chart properties panel. For example, when making a
month by month chart as we have in example, there is often not enough
space for the month names along the category axis. This can be fixed by
rotating the labels by for example -40 degrees, by using the property
Category Axis Tick Label
Rotation.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_72.jpg)

Many other options are available to give the chart the desired
look.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_73.jpg)

## Adicionando o Relatório ao DHIS2 { #adding-the-report-to-dhis2 } 

We can now switch to DHIS2 and import our report. Go to the Report
Module in DHIS2, and select "Standard Report". In the "Standard Report"
screen, click "Add new", or edit an existing one.

In the following screen, there are several actions we need to take.
First, enter a name for the new "Standard Report". Second, for design,
click "Choose File" and find the .jrxml-file you have edited in iReport.
Then we select the report table that we used as a basis for the report
in iReport. Click add, and it should move to the "Selected report
tables" area. Finally, click
save.


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireport/27_new_std_report.jpg)

O relatório agora está disponível como um "Relatório Padrão" no DHIS2:

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireport/28_done.jpg)

## Algumas orientações finais { #some-final-guidelines } 

  - Use the same version of iReport and DHIS2's version of Jasper
    reports. See the About page in DHIS2 for the Jasper version in use.

  - Use report tables with cross tab dimensions as your data source for
    your report designs. This will make it a lot easier to design
    reports where you need to put specific indicators, periods, or
    orgunits on columns.

  - Learn from others, there are many DHIS2 report designs for Jasper on
    launchpad, see
    http://bazaar.launchpad.net/~DHIS2-devs-core/DHIS2/trunk/files/head:/resources/



## Criação de relatórios padrão baseados em SQL { #designing-sql-based-standard-reports } 

A standard report might be based on SQL queries. This is useful when you
need to access multiple tables in the DHIS2 database and do custom
selects and joins.

\- This step is optional, but handy when you need to debug your reports
and when you have direct access to the database you want to use. Click
on the "report datasources" button, "New", "Database JDBC connection"
and click "next". In this window you can give you connection a name and
select the JDBC driver. PostgreSQL and MySQL should come included in
your iReport. Then enter the JDBC connection URL, username and password.
The last three refers to your database and can be retrieved from your
DHIS2 configuration file (hibernate.properties). Click "save". You have
now connected iReport to your database.

\- Go to standard reports and click "add new", then "get report
template". Open this template in iReport. This template contains a
series of report parameters which can be used to create dynamic SQL
statements. These parameters will be substituted based on the report
parameters which we will later select and include in the standard
report. The parameters are:

  - periods - string of comma-separated identifiers of the relative
    periods

  - period\_name - name of the reporting period

  - Organisationunits - identificador das unidades organizacionais selecionadas

  - organisationunit\_name - name of the reporting organisation unit

  - organisationunit\_level - level of the reporting organisation unit

  - organisationunit\_level\_column - name of the corresponding column
    in the \_orgunitstructure resource table

These parameters can be included in SQL statements using the
`$P\!{periods}` syntax, where "periods" represents the parameter.

\- To create a SQL query in iReport, click on the "report query" button.
Write or paste your query into the textarea. An example SQL query using
parameters which will create a report displaying raw data values at the
fourth level in the org unit hierarchy is:
`` `
    selecione district.name como district, chiefdom.name como chiefdom, ou.name como facilidade,
    bcg.value as bcg, yellowfever.value as yellowfever, sarampo.value as sarampo
    da unidade de organização ou
    junção externa esquerda _orgunitstructure ous
      em (ou.organisationunitid = ous.organisationunitid)
    left outer join distrito da unidade de organização
      em (ous.idlevel2 = district.organisationunitid)
    left outer join organisationunit chiefdom
      em (ous.idlevel3 = chiefdom.organisationunitid)
    junção externa esquerda (
      selecione sourceid, sum (cast (valor como precisão dupla)) como valor
      de datavalue
      onde dataelementid = 359706
      e periodid = $ P! {periods}
      group by sourceid) como bcg em bcg.sourceid = ou.organisationunitid
    junção externa esquerda (
      selecione sourceid, sum (cast (valor como precisão dupla)) como valor
      de datavalue
      onde dataelementid = 35
      e periodid = $ P! {periods}
      group by sourceid) como yellowfever em yellowfever.sourceid = ou.organisationunitid
    onde ous.level = 4
    e ous. $ P! {organisationunit_level_column} = $ P! {organisationunits}
    ordenar por distrito.name, chiefdom.name, ou.name;
`` `
Notice how all parameters are used in the query, along with SQL joins of
resource tables in the DHIS2 database.

\- Finally, back in the add new report screen, we click on "Use JDBC
data source". This enables you to select any relative period and report
parameters for your report. Relative periods are relative to today's
date. Report parameters will cause a prompt during report creation and
makes it possible to dynamically select organisation units and periods
to use for your report during runtime. For the example above, we must
select "reporting month" under relative periods and both "reporting
month" and "organisation unit" under report parameters. Click save. This
will redirect you to the list of reports, where you can click the green
"create" icon next to your report to render it.

## Criação de relatórios padrão baseados em HTML { #designing-html-based-standard-reports } 

A standard report can be designed using purely HTML and JavaScript. This
requires a little bit of development experience in the mentioned
subjects. The benefit of HTML based standard reports is that it allows
for maximum flexibility. Using HTML you can design exactly the report
you want, positioning tables, logos and values on the page according to
your design needs. You can write and save your standard report design in
a regular text file. To upload your HTML based standard report to DHIS2
do the following:

  - Acesse os relatórios padrão e clique em "Adicionar novo".

  - Dê um nome ao relatório.

  - Selecione "Relatório HTML" como tipo.

  - If you want to you can download a report template by clicking on
    "Get HTML report template".

  - Select desired relative periods - these will be available in
    JavaScript in your report.

  - Select report parameters - these will be available in JavaScript in
    your report.

The report template, which you can download after selecting report type,
is a useful starting point for developing HTML based standard reports.
It gives you the basic structure and suggests how you can use JavaScript
and CSS in the report. JavaScript and CSS can easily be included using
standard script and style tags.

If you selected relative periods when creating the standard report you
can access these in JavaScript like this:

    var períodos = dhis2.report.periods; // Uma matriz com identificadores de período
    período var = períodos [0];

If you selected the organisation unit report parameter when creating the
standard report you can access the selected organisation unit in
JavaScript like this:

    var orgUnit = dhis2.report.organisationUnit; // Um objeto
    var id = orgUnit.id;
    var name = orgUnit.name;
    var code = orgUnit.code;

When designing these reports you can utilize the analytics Web API
resource in order to retrieve aggregated data in JavaScript. Have a look
in the Web API chapter in this guide for a closer description. As a
complete, minimal example you can retrieve analytics data after the
report has been loaded and use that data to set the inner text of an
HTML element like this:

    <script type="text/javascript">
    $( document ).ready( function() {
        $.get( "../api/analytics?dimension=dx:FnYCr2EAzWS;eTDtyyaSA7f&dimension=pe:THIS_YEAR&filter=ou:ImspTQPwCqd", function( json ) {
            $( "#bcg" ).html( json.rows[0][2] );
            $( "#fic" ).html( json.rows[1][2] );
        } );
    } );
    </script>

    <div>BGG coverage: <span id="bcg"></span></div>
    <div>FIC coverage: <span id="fic"></span></div>

A few other tips: To include graphics you can convert an image to SVG
and embed that SVG content directly in the report - DHIS2 is based on
HTML 5 where SVG tags are valid markup. To include charts and maps in
your report you can use the charts and maps resources in the Web API.
You can use the full capability of the Web API from JavaScript in your
report - it may be useful to read through the Web API chapter to get an
overview of all available resources.



# Configurações do sistema { #settings } 

## Configurações Gerais { #system_general_settings } 



Table: General settings

| Setting | Descrição |
|---|--|
| **Cache strategy** | Decides for how long reports analytics responses should be cached.<br> <br>If you use the scheduled, nightly analytics update, you may want to select **Cache until 6 AM tomorrow**. This is because data in reports change at that time, and you can safely cache data up to the moment when the analytics tables are updated.<br> <br>If you are loading data continuously into the analytics tables, select **No cache**.<br> <br>For other cases select the amount of time you want the data to be cached. |
| **Infrastructural indicators** | Defines an indicator group where the member indicators should describe data about the organisation units' infrastructure.<br> <br>You can view the infrastructural data in the **GIS** app: right-click a facility and click **Show information**. |
| **Infrastructural data elements** | Defines a data element group where the member data elements should describe data about the organisation units' infrastructure.<br> <br>Infrastructural data elements can be population, doctors, beds, Internet connectivity and climate.<br> <br>You can view the infrastructural data in the **GIS** app: right-click a facility and click **Show information**. |
| **Infrastructural period type** | Sets the frequency for which the data elements in the infrastructural data elements group are captured.<br> <br>This will typically be yearly. When viewing the infrastructural data you will be able to select the time period of the data source.<br> <br>You can view the infrastructural data in the **GIS** app: right-click a facility and click **Show information**. |
| **Default relative period for analysis** | Setting this value will determine which relative period is selected as the default in the analytics apps. |
| **Feedback recipients** | Defines a user group where the members will receive all messages sent via the feedback function in the **Dashboard** app.<br> <br>This will typically be members of the super user team who are able to support and answer questions coming from end-users. |
| **System update notification recipients** | Defines a user group where the members will receive messages about new system updates available for download, the recipients will only receive the message once for each new patch version of the DHIS2 installation. If no such user group is defined, the system defaults to sending it to all users that have the ALL authority.                                                                                                                                                                             |
| **Max offline organisation unit levels** | Defines how many levels in the organisation unit hierarchy will be available offline in the organisation unit tree widget.<br> <br>Under normal circumstances you can leave this on the lowest level, which is default is the default setting.<br> <br>It can be useful to set it to a higher level to reduce initial load time in cases where you have a large number of organisation units, typically more than 30 000. |
| **Data analysis std dev factor** | Sets the number of standard deviations used in the outlier analysis performed on the captured data in the **Data Entry** app.<br> <br>The default value is 2. A high value will catch less outlier values than a low value. |
| **Phone number area code** | The area code for the area in which your deployment is located.<br> <br>Used for sending and receiving SMS. Typically, this is a country code.<br> <br>*+260* (country code for Zambia) |
| **Enable multi-organisation unit forms** | Enables support to enter data forms for multiple organisation units at the same time in the **Data Entry** app.<br> <br>If you've enabled this setting, you can in the **Data Entry** app, click on the parent organisation unit for the children that you want to enter data for, and the data set list will include data sets that are assigned to the children of that parent. |
| **Acceptance required before approval** | When this setting is selected, acceptance of data will be required first before submission to the next approval level is possible. |
| **Gather analytical object statistics in dashboard views** | Gather usage analytics data when analytical objects (e.g., maps, charts, etc.) are viewed within a dashboard. Without this setting, analytics data on the objects  is gathered only when the objects are viewed outside of a dashboard. |
| **Include passive dashboard views in usage analytics statistics** | Gather usage analytics data on the first dashboard shown when the Dashboard app is launched (otherwise only explicit dashboard selections are counted). |

## Configurações de análise { #system_analytics_settings } 



Table: Analytics settings

| Setting | Descrição |
|---|---|
| **Default relative period for analysis** | Defines the relative period to use by default in analytics app: **Data Visualizer**, **Event Reports**, **Event Visualizer**, **GIS** and **Pivot Table** apps. The relative period will be automatically selected when you open these apps.<br> <br>Recommended setting: the most commonly used relative period among your users. |
| **Property to display in analysis modules** | Sets whether you want to display the metadata objects' names or short names in the analytics apps: **Data Visualizer**, **Event Reports**, **Event Visualizer**, **GIS** and **Pivot Table** apps.<br> <br>The user can override this setting in the **Settings** app: **User settings** \> **Property to display in analysis modules**. |
| **Default digit group separator to display in analysis modules** | Sets the default digit group separator in the analytics apps: **Data Visualizer**, **Event Reports**, **Event Visualizer**, **GIS** and **Pivot Table** apps. |
| **Hide daily periods** | Hide daily periods in the analysis tools |
| **Hide weekly periods** | Hide weekly periods in the analysis tools |
| **Hide monthly periods** | Hide monthly periods in the analysis tools |
| **Hide bimonthly periods** | Hide bimonthly periods in the analysis tools |
| **Financial year relative start month** | Defines which month (April, July or October) the the relative financial year in the analytics apps should begin on. |
| **Cacheability** | Sets whether analytics data responses should be served with public or private visibility.<br> <br>**Private**: Any node or server between the DHIS2 server and the end user which has the ability to cache can NOT cache the web page. This is useful if the page served can or do contain sensitive information. This means that each time you want a web page, either you get a new page from the DHIS2 server, or the DHIS2 server caches the page. No other server than the DHIS2 server are allowed to cache the page.<br> <br>**Public**: Any node or server between the DHIS2 server and the end user which has the ability to cache can cache the web page. This relives the traffic to the DHIS2 server and potentially speeds up the subsequent page loading speed. |
| **Analytics cache mode** | Support two different modes:<br> <br>**Progressive**: this relates to the new progressive caching feature for analytics. When enabled, it OVERRIDES the global caching strategy for analytics requests. This mode will trigger HTTP and data layer caching for all analytics requests. When enabling this mode, the *caching factor* is MANDATORY.<br> <br>**Fixed**: the requests will be cached based on the period of time defined in *cache strategy.* |
| **Caching factor** | Select a value for the caching factor. This field is only available when the analytics cache mode has been set to *progressive*.<br> <br>It shows a list of integers where each integer represents an absolute caching factor. This integer will be used internally to calculate the final expiration time for each analytics request. Higher the caching factor, for longer the request will be cached. |
| **Max number of years to hide unapproved data in analytics** | Sets whether and for how long back in time analytics should respect the approval level of the data. Typically, data which is several years old would be considered to be approved by default. In order to speed up analytics requests, you can choose to ignore the actual approval level of historical data.<br> <br>**Never check approval**: no data will be hidden, irrespective of its data approval status.<br> <br>**Check approval for all data**: approval status will always be checked.<br> <br>Other options, for example **Last 3 years**: approval status will be checked for data which is newer than 3 years old; older data will not be checked. |
| **Threshold for analytics data caching** | Sets whether to enable caching data older than the specified number of years only.<br> <br>This allows for returning the most recent data directly with no caching, while serving cached version of older data for performance concerns. |
| **Respect category option start and end date in analytics table export** | This setting controls whether analytics should filter data which is associated with a category option with a start and end date, but which is not associated with a period within the category options interval of validity. |
| **Allow users to switch dashboard favorite view type** | Allows users to switch dashboard favorites' view between charts, pivot tables and maps, using the dashboard item menu. |
| **Allow users to open dashboard favorite in relevant app** | Allows users to open dashboard items in the app for that type of item, using the dashboard item menu. |
| **Allow users to show dashboard favorite interpretations and details** | Allows users to see dashboard favorites' interpretations and details, using the dashboard item menu. |
| **Allow users to view dashboard favorite in fullscreen** | Allows users to view dashboard favorites in fullscreen, using the dashboard item menu. |
| **Default basemap** | Select which basemap will be selected by default in the **Maps** app. If no value is selected, then **OSM Light** will be used.|

## Configurações do servidor { #system_server_settings } 



Table: Server settings

| Setting | Descrição |
|---|---|
| **Number of database server CPUs** | Sets the number of CPU cores of your database server.<br> <br>This allows the system to perform optimally when the database is hosted on a different server than the application server, since analytics in DHIS2 scales linearly with the number of available cores. |
| **System notifications email address** | Defines the email address which will receive system notifications.<br> <br>Notifications about failures in processes such as analytics table generation will be sent here. This is useful for application monitoring. |
| **Google Analytics (Universal Analytics) key** | Sets the Google UA key to provide usage analytics for your DHIS2 instance through the Google Analytics platform. It should be noted that currently, not all apps in DHIS2 support Google Analytics, so certain activity of your users may not appear in this platform.<br> <br>You can read more about Google Analytics at [google.com/analytics](https://google.com/analytics). |
| **Google Maps API key** | Defines the API key for the Google Maps API. This is used to display maps within DHIS2. |
| **Bing Maps API key** | Defines the API key for the Bing Maps API. This is used to display maps within DHIS2. |

Table: Limit settings

| Setting | Descrição |
|---|---|
| **Maximum number of analytics records** | Increase this number to provide more records from the analytics.<br> <br>The default value is 50,000.<br>      <br>    **Warning**<br>     <br>    Use the setting **Unlimited** carefully, it might result in a very high load on your server. |
| **Maximum number of SQL view records** | Set the maximum number of records in a SQL view.<br> <br>The default value is Unlimited. |
| **Maximum number of Tracked Entity Instance that can be fetched from database** | Sets the limit on maximum tracked entity instance records that can be fetched from database. If user does not provide any value then default value which is 50,000 will be used.<br>Setting this to 0 or any negative integer will disable this setting. <br>**Warning**<br>Disabling this setting may result in high load on the server.|



## Configurações de aparência { #system_appearance_settings } 



Table: Appearance settings

| Setting | Descrição |
|---|---|
| **Select language** | Sets the language for which you can then enter translations of the following settings:<br>       * **Application introduction**<br> * **Application title**<br> * **Application notification**<br> * **Application left-side footer**<br> * **Application right-side footer**      <br>    **Note**     <br>    Before each of these settings can accept a translated value, they first need to have a default/fallback value. This value can be set by selecting *System default (fallback)* in this dropdown. |
| **Application title** | Sets the application title on the top menu. |
| **Application introduction** | Sets an introduction of the system which will be visible on the top-left part of the login page. |
| **Application notification** | Sets a notification which will be visible on the front page under the login area. |
| **Application left-side footer** | Sets a text in the left-side footer area of the login page. |
| **Application right-side footer** | Sets a text in the right-side footer area of the login page. |
| **Style** | Sets the style (look-and-feel) of the system.<br> <br>The user can override this setting in the **Settings** app: **User settings** \> **Style**.<br>      <br>    **Note**<br>     <br>    Due to technical reasons, it's not possible to change the color of the newest version of the header bar. The apps with the newest header bar will retain the blue header bar. |
| **Start page** | Sets the page or app which the user will be redirected to after log in.<br> <br>Recommended setting: the **Dashboard** app. |
| **Enable light-weight start page** | Instructs apps to render a light-weight and fast landing page. Recommended in low-bandwidth environments. |
| **Help page link** | Defines the URL which users will see when they click **Profile** \>**Help**. |
| **Flag** | Sets the flag which is displayed in the left menu of the **Dashboard** app. |
| **Interface language** | Sets the language used in the user interface.<br> <br>The user can override this setting in the **Settings** app: **User settings** \> **Interface language**. |
| **Database language** | Sets the language used in the database.<br> <br>The user can override this setting in the **Settings** app: **User settings** \> **Database language**. |
| **Require authority to add to view object lists** | If you select this option, you'll hide menu and index page items and links to lists of objects if the current user doesn't have the authority to create the type of objects (privately or publicly). |
| **Custom login page logo** | Select this option and upload an image to add your logo to the login page. |
| **Custom top menu logo** | Select this option and upload an image to add your logo to the left in the top menu. |

## Configurações de e-mail { #system_email_settings } 



Table: Email settings

| Setting | Descrição |
|---|---|
| **Host name** | Sets the host name of the SMTP server.<br> <br>When you use Google SMTP services, the host name should be *smtp.gmail.com*. |
| **Port** | Sets the port to connect to the SMTP server. |
| **User name** | The user name of the user account with the SMTP server.<br> <br>mail@dhis2.org |
| **Password** | The password of the user account with the SMTP server. |
| **TLS** | Select this option if the SMPT server requires TLS for connections. |
| **Email sender** | The email address to use as sender when sending out emails. |
| **Send me a test email** | Sends a test email to the current user logged into DHIS2. |

## Configurações de acesso { #system_access_settings } 



Table: Access settings

| Setting | Descrição |
|---|---|
| **Self registration account user role** | Defines which user role should be given to self-registered user accounts.<br> <br>To enable self-registration of users: select any user role from the list. A link to the self-registration form will be displayed on the login page.<br>      <br>    **Note**<br>     <br>    To enable self-registration, you must also select a **Self registration account organisation unit**.<br>  <br>To disable self-registration of users: select **Disable self registration**. |
| **Self registration account organisation unit** | Defines which organisation unit should be associated with self-registered users.<br>      <br>    **Note**<br>     <br>    To enable self-registration, you must also select a **Self registration account user role**. |
| **Do not require reCAPTCHA for self registration** | Defines whether you want to use reCAPTCHA for user self-registration. This is enabled by default. |
| **Enable user account recovery** | Defines whether users can restore their own passwords.<br> <br>When this setting is enabled, a link to the account recovery form will be displayed on the front page.<br>      <br>    **Note**<br>     <br>    User account recovery requires that you have configured email settings (SMTP). |
| **Lock user account temporarily after multiple failed login attempts** | Defines whether the system should lock user accounts after five successive failed login attempts over a timespan of 15 minutes.<br> <br>The account will be locked for 15 minutes, then the user can attempt to log in again. |
| **Allow users to grant own user roles** | Defines whether users can grant user roles which they have themselves to others when creating new users. |
| **Allow assigning object to related objects during add or update** | Defines whether users should be allowed to assign an object to a related object when they create or edit metadata objects.<br> <br>You can allow users to assign an organisation unit to data sets and organisation unit group sets when creating or editing the organisation unit. |
| **Require user account password change** | Defines whether users should be forced to change their passwords every 3, 6 or 12 months.<br> <br>If you don't want to force users to change password, select **Never**. |
| **Enable password expiry alerts** | When set, users will receive a notification when their password is about to expire. |
| **Minimum characters in password** | Defines the minimum number of characters users must have in their passwords.<br> <br>You can select 8 (default), 10, 12 or 14. |
| **CORS whitelist** | Whitelists a set of URLs which can access the DHIS2 API from another domain. Each URL should be entered on separate lines. Cross-origin resource sharing (CORS) is a mechanism that allows restricted resources (e.g. javascript files) on a web page to be requested from another domain outside the domain from which the first resource was served. |

## Configurações da agenda { #system_calendar_settings } 



Table: Calendar settings

| Setting | Descrição |
|---|---|
| **Calendar** | Defines which calendar the system will use.<br> <br>The system supports the following calendars: Coptic, Ethiopian, Gregorian, Islamic (Lunar Hijri), ISO 8601, Julian, Nepali, Persian (Solar Hijri) and Thai.<br><br>This is a system wide setting. It is not possible to have multiple calendars within a single DHIS2 instance.<br><br>[Refer here for more information about the difference between Gregorian and ISO 8601.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_8601#Week_dates)</a> |
| **Date format** | Defines which date format the system will use. |

## Configurações de importação de dados { #system_data_import_settings } 

The data import settings apply to extra controls which can be enabled to
validate aggregate data which is imported through the web API. They
provide optional constraints on what should be considered a conflict
during import. The constraints are applied to each individual data value
in the import.



Table: Data import settings

| Setting | Descrição |
|---|---|
| **Require periods to match period type of data set** | Require period of data value to be of the same period type as the data sets for which the data element of data value is assigned to. |
| **Require data elements to be part of data set** | Require data element of a data value to be assigned to a data set. If a specific data set is specified on import, the system will check that data values are associated with the specified data set. |
| **Require category option combos to match category combo of data element** | Require category option combination of data value to be part of the category combination of the data element of the data value. |
| **Require organisation units to match assignment of data set** | Require organisation unit of data value to be assigned to one or more of the data sets which the data element of data value is assigned to. |
| **Require attribute option combos to match category combo of data set** | Require attribute option combination of data value to be part of the category combination of the data set which the data element of data value is assigned to. |
| **Require category option combo to be specified** | Require category option combination of data value to be specified.<br> <br>By default it will fall back to default category option combination if not specified. |
| **Require attribute option combo to be specified** | Require attribute option combination of data value to be specified.<br> <br>By default it will fall back to default attribute option combination if not specified. |

## Configurações de sincronização { #synchronization-settings } 

The following settings are used for both data and metadata
synchronization.

> **Note**
>
> For more information about how you configure metadata synchronization,
> refer to [Configure metadata
> synchronizing](https://docs.dhis2.org/master/en/user/html/metadata_sync.html)



Table: Synchronization settings

| Setting | Descrição |
|---|---|
| ** URL do servidor remoto ** | Defines the URL of the remote server running DHIS2 to upload data values to.<br> <br>It is recommended to use of SSL/HTTPS since user name and password are sent with the request (using basic authentication).<br> <br>The system will attempt to synchronize data once every minute.<br> <br>The system will use this setting for metadata synchronization too.<br>      <br>    **Note**<br>     <br>    To enable data and metadata synchronization, you must also enable jobs for **Data synchronization** and **Metadata synchronization** in the **Scheduler** app. |
| ** Nome de usuário do servidor remoto ** | The user name of the DHIS2 user account on the remote server to use for data synchronization.<br>      <br>    **Note**<br>     <br>    If you've enabled metadata versioning, you must make sure that the configured user has the authority "F_METADATA_MANAGE". |
| ** Senha do servidor remoto ** | The password of the DHIS2 user account on the remote server. The password will be stored encrypted. |
| **Enable versioning for metadata sync** | Defines whether to create versions of metadata when you synchronize metadata between central and local instances. |
| **Don't sync metadata if DHIS versions differ** | The metadata schema changes between versions of DHIS2 which could make different metadata versions incompatible.<br> <br>When enabled, this option will not allow metadata synchronization to occur if the central and local instance(s) have different DHIS2 versions. This apply to metadata synchronization done both via the user interface and the API.<br> <br>The only time it might be valuable to disable this option is when synchronizing basic entities, for example data elements, that have not changed across DHIS2 versions. |
| **Best effort** | A type of metadata version which decides how the importer on local instance(s) will handle the metadata version.<br> <br>*Best effort* means that if the metadata import encounters missing references (for example missing data elements on a data element group import) it ignores the errors and continues the import. |
| **Atomic** | A type of metadata version which decides how the importer on local instance(s) will handle the metadata version.<br> <br>*Atomic* means all or nothing - the metadata import will fail if any of the references do not exist. |

## Clientes OAuth2 { #system_oauth2_settings } 

You create, edit and delete OAuth2 clients in the **System Settings**
app.

1.  Abra os aplicativos de ** Configurações do sistema ** e clique em ** clientes OAuth2 **.

2.  Clique no botão adicionar.

3.  Insira ** Nome **, ** ID do cliente ** e ** Segredo do cliente **.

4.  Selecione ** Tipos de concessão **.


    | Grant type | Description |
    |---|---|
    | **Password** | TBA |
    | **Refresh token** | TBA |
    | **Authorization code** | TBA |

5.  Enter **Redirect URIs**. If you've multiple URIs, separate them with
    a line.

## System update notification { #system_update_notification_settings }

The system will default send a notification in the mail inbox under the "system" category when there is a new patch version available for download. 
This notification will be sent to the users who have the "ALL" authority, unless the "System update notification recipients" user group is defined, under the "General settings". 

It is also possible to disable this feature altogether by setting the "system.update_notifications_enabled" configuration variable to "off", in the "dhis.conf" file.

Under the hood, it works by calling (GET, with no parameters) on a REST API endpoint on a central server every day around 2:00 AM.

This is the URL: [https://releases.dhis2.org/v1/versions/stable.json](https://releases.dhis2.org/v1/versions/stable.json)



# Using the Data Exchange app { #data_exchange }

## About the Data Exchange app { #about_data_exchange }

The data exchange app allows for exchanging data between the DHIS 2 instance where the app is installed and a target instance of DHIS 2, or other software that are capable of importing the DHIS 2 data value set format. Data can also be exchanged within a DHIS 2 instance, for instance for aggregation of tracker data and saving the result as aggregate data.

To exchange data, one or many _aggregate data exchanges_ must be configured in the system. A data exchange defines the data elements, indicators, periods and organisation units to exchange data with the target instance. Please consult the _Aggregate data exchange_ section in the _Data exchange_ chapter in the Developer guide for a detailed explanation.

## Overview { #overview_data_exchange }

The Data Exchange app offers different sections:

![](resources/images/data_exchange/data-exchange-overview.png)

1. **Data exchange selection:** The data exchange drop-down menu in the top bar allows for selecting the data exchange.
2. **Data preview:** The data preview section will display the data to be exchanged with the target instance.
3. **Submit data:** Clicking the **Submit data** button will exchange data defined by the currently selected data exchange.

## Exchanging data { #exchanging_data }

To get started with data exchange:

1. Select a data exchange from the data exchange drop-down.
2. Preview the data to ensure accuracy and quality.
3. Click **Submit data**. This will bring up the confirmation dialog.
4. Inspect the parameters for which to submit data and click **Yes, submit**. This will bring up a submission summary.
5. Inspect the submission summary, and click **Close**.

![](resources/images/data_exchange/data-exchange-submit.png)

The submission summary indicates the outcome, meaning whether the operation was a success or failure, and how many data values were imported, updated and ignored as part of the data exchange.

![](resources/images/data_exchange/data-exchange-submission-success.png)



# Administração de Dados { #data_admin }

The data administration module provides a range of functions to ensure
that the data stored in the DHIS2 database is integral and that the
database performance is optimised. These functions should be executed on
a regular basis by a data administrator to ensure that the quality of
the data stored is optimal.

## Data integrity { #data_admin_data_integrity }

DHIS2 can perform a wide range of data integrity checks on the data
contained in the database. Identifying and correcting data integrity
issues is extremely important for ensuring that the data used for
analysis purposes is valid. Each of the data integrity checks that are
performed by the system will be described, along with general procedures
that can be performed to resolve these issues.

### Elementos de dados sem conjunto de dados { #data-elements-without-data-set } 

Each data element must be assigned to a data set. Values for data
elements will not be able to be entered into the system if a data
element is not assigned to a data set. Choose
Maintenance-\>Datasets-\>Edit from the main menu and then add the
"orphaned" data element to the appropriate data set.

### Elementos de dados sem grupos { #data-elements-without-groups } 

Some Data Elements have been allocated to several Data Element Groups.
This is currently not allowed, because it will result in duplication of
linked data records in the analytics record sets that provide aggregated
data. Go to Maintenance -\> Data Element Groups to review each Data
Element identified and remove the incorrect Group allocations.

### Elementos de dados que violam conjuntos de grupos exclusivos { #data-elements-violating-exclusive-group-sets } 

Some data elements have been allocated to several data element groups
that are members of the same data element group set. All group sets in
DHIS2 are defined as exclusive, which means that a data element can
*only* be allocated to *one* data element group within that group set.
Go to Maintenance -\> Data elements and indicators -\> Data element
groups to review each data element identified in the integrity check.
Either remove the data element from all groups except the one that it
should be allocated to, or see if one of the groups should be placed in
a different group set.

### Elementos de dados no conjunto de dados, mas não em formulários ou seções { #data-elements-in-data-set-but-not-in-form-or-sections } 

Data elements have been assigned to a data set, but have not been
assigned to any sections of the data set forms. All data sets which use
section forms, should generally have all data elements in the data set
assigned to exactly one section of the dataset.

### Elementos de dados atribuídos a conjuntos de dados com diferentes tipos de período { #data-elements-assigned-to-data-sets-with-different-period-types } 

Data elements should not be assigned to two separate data sets whose
period types differ. The recommended approach would be to create two
separate data elements (for instance a monthly and yearly data element)
and assign these to respective datasets.

### Conjuntos de dados não atribuídos a unidades de organização { #data-sets-not-assigned-to-organisation-units } 

Todos os conjuntos de dados devem ser atribuídos a pelo menos uma unidade organizacional.

### Seções com combinações de categorias inválidas { #sections-with-invalid-category-combinations } 

Data sets which use section forms should only have a single category
combination within each section. This violation could result from
assigning a data element to a section, but then changing the category
combination of this data element at a later point in time.

### Indicadores com fórmulas idênticas { #indicators-with-identical-formulas } 

Although this rule will not affect data quality, it generally does not
make sense to have two indicators with the exact same definition. Review
the identified indicators and their formulas and delete or modify any
indicator that appears to be the duplicate.

### Indicadores sem grupos { #indicators-without-groups } 

All data elements and indicators must be assigned to at least one group,
so these Indicators need to be allocated to their correct Data Element
and Indicator Group. From the main menu, go to Data elements/Indicators
-\> Indicator Groups, and allocate each of the \`Orphaned\` indicators
to its correct group.

### Numeradores de indicador inválidos { #invalid-indicator-numerators } 

Violations of this rule may be caused by an incorrect reference to a
deleted or modified data element. Review the indicator and make
corrections to the numerator definition.

### Denominadores de indicador inválidos { #invalid-indicator-denominators } 

Violations of this rule may be caused by an incorrect reference to a
deleted or modified data element. Review the indicator and make
corrections to the denominator definition.

### Indicadores que violam conjuntos de grupos exclusivos { #indicators-violating-exclusive-group-sets } 

Some indicators have been allocated to several indicator groups that are
members of the same indicator group set. All group sets in DHIS2 are
defined as exclusive, which means that an indicator can *only* be
allocated to *one* indicator group within that group set. Go to
Maintenance -\> Data elements and indicators -\> Indicator groups to
review each indicator identified in the integrity check. Either remove
the indicator from all groups except the one that it should be allocated
to, or see if one of the groups should be placed in a different group
set.

### Períodos duplicados { #duplicate-periods } 

If periods have been imported from external applications, it may be
possible that some periods will be duplicated. If you have any periods
which appear to be duplicated here, you will need to resolve these
directly in the DHIS2 database. All data which has been assigned to the
duplicated period, should be moved to the correct period, and the
duplicate period should be removed.

### Unidades de organização com referências cíclicas { #organisation-units-with-cyclic-references } 

Organisation units cannot be both parent and children of each other,
directly nor indirectly. If this situation occurs, you will need to
resolve the cyclic reference directly in the DHIS2 database in the
"organisation unit" table, by reassigning the "parentid" field of the
organisation units.

### Unidades de organização órfãs { #orphaned-organisation-units } 

All organisation units must exist within the organisation unit
hierarchy. Go to Organisation units -\> Hierarchy Operations and move the
offending organisation unit into the proper position in the hierarchy.

### Unidades organizacionais sem grupos { #organisation-units-without-groups } 

All organisation units *must* be allocated to at least *one* group. The
problem might either be that you have not defined any compulsory OrgUnit
Group Set at all, or that there are violations of the compulsory rule
for some OrgUnits . NOTE: If you have defined no compulsory OrgUnit
Group Sets, then you must first define them by going to Organisation
units-\>Organisation unit group sets and define at least one compulsory
Group Set (the group set 'Type' are nearly universally relevant). If you
have the relevant group sets, go to Maintenance -\> OrgUnit Groups to
review each OrgUnit identified and add the relevant Group allocation.

### Unidades organizacionais que violam conjuntos de grupos obrigatórios { #organisation-units-violating-compulsory-group-sets } 

These organisation units have not been assigned to the any organisation
unit group within one of the *compulsory* organisation unit group sets.
When a group set is defined as compulsory, it means that an organisation
unit must be allocated to at least one organisation unit group within
that group set. For instance, all organisation units must belong to one
of the groups in the 'Type' group set. It might belong to the
\`Hospital\` or the \`Clinic\` or any other 'type' group - but it must
belong to exactly one of them. Go to Organisation units-\>Organisation
unit groups to review each organisation unit identified in the integrity
check. Allocate all organisation units to exactly one compulsory group.

### Unidades organizacionais que violam conjuntos de grupos exclusivos { #organisation-units-violating-exclusive-group-sets } 

Some organisation units have been allocated to several organisation unit
groups that are members of the same organisation unit group set. All
group sets in DHIS2 are defined as exclusive, which means that an
organisation unit can *only* be allocated to *one* organisation unit
group within that Group Set. For instance, one organisation unit cannot
normally belong to the both the 'Hospital' and 'Clinic' groups , but
rather to only to one of them. Go to Organisation unit-\>Organisation
unit groups to review each organisation unit identified in the integrity
check. Remove the organisation units from all groups except the one that
it should be allocated to.

### Grupos de unidades organizacionais sem conjuntos de grupos { #organisation-unit-groups-without-group-sets } 

The organisation unit groups listed here have not been allocated to a
group set. Go to Maintenance-\>Organisation unit-\>Organisation unit
group sets and allocate the Organisation unit group to the appropriate
group set.

### Regras de validação sem grupos { #validation-rules-without-groups } 

All validation rules must be assigned to a group. Go to **Maintenance**
app \> **Validation rule group** and assign the offending validation
rule to a group.

### Expressões do lado esquerdo da regra de validação inválida { #invalid-validation-rule-left-side-expressions } 

An error exists in the left-side validation rule definition. Go to
**Maintenance** app -\> **Validation rule** and click **Edit** on the
offending rule. Click **Left side** and make the required corrections.

### Expressões do lado direito da regra de validação inválida { #invalid-validation-rule-right-side-expressions } 

An error exists in the right-side validation rule definition. Go to
**Maintenance** app -\> **Validation rule** and click **Edit** on the
offending rule. Click **Right side** and make the required corrections.

### Regras do programa sem condição { #programrules-with-no-condition } 

O relatório destacará todas as ** Regras do programa ** não configuradas com ** Condição **. A avaliação de regras sem condição é sempre avaliada como falsa.

### Regras do programa sem prioridade { #programrules-with-no-priority } 

O relatório destacará todas as ** Regras do programa ** não configuradas com ** Prioridade **. Isso é opcional, mas sua existência é muito importante quando ** ProgramRuleActionType ** é ** ASSIGN **. As regras com o tipo de ação ASSIGN devem ter prioridade mais alta do que o resto dos tipos de ação.

### Regras do programa sem ação { #programrules-with-no-action } 

O relatório destacará todas as ** Regras do programa ** não configuradas com qualquer ** ProgramRuleAction **.

### ProgramRuleVariables sem dataElements { #programrulevariables-without-dataelements } 

O relatório destacará todas as ** variáveis de regra do programa ** não configuradas com ** DataElement **. O relatório será baseado na configuração do tipo de fonte. DataElement deve ser fornecido quando o tipo de origem de ProgramRuleVariable é ** DataElement **.

### ProgramRuleVariables sem atributos { #programrulevariables-without-attributes } 

O relatório destacará todas as ** variáveis de regra do programa ** não configuradas com ** TrackedEntityAttribute **. O relatório será baseado na configuração do tipo de fonte. TrackedEntityAttribute deve ser fornecido quando o tipo de origem de ProgramRuleVariable for ** Atributo **.

### ProgramRuleActions sem objetos de dados. { #programruleactions-with-no-data-objects } 

Report will highlight all the **Program rule actions** not configured with any Data object. Data object can be either **DataElement** of **TrackedEntityAttribute**. There are certain ProgramRuleActions which are responsible for assigning values to either dataElement or trackedEntityAttribute.

### ProgramRuleActions sem notificação { #programruleactions-with-no-notification } 

O relatório destacará todas as ** Ações de regra de programa ** que têm ProgramRuleActionType definido como SENDMESSAGE / SCHEDULEMESSAGE onde a configuração não fornece nenhum link para notificação.

### ProgramRuleActions sem id de seção { #programruleactions-with-no-section-id } 

O relatório destacará todas as ** Ações de regra de programa ** que têm ProgramRuleActionType definido como ** HIDESECTION **, mas a configuração não fornece nenhum id de seção.

### ProgramRuleActions sem id de estágio do programa { #programruleactions-with-no-program-stage-id } 

O relatório destacará todas as ** Ações de regra de programa ** que têm ProgramRuleActionType definido como ** HIDEPROGRAMSTAGE **, mas a configuração não fornece nenhum id de estágio do programa.

### Expressão de indicador de programa inválida { #invalid-program-indicator-expression } 

Relata todas as violações na expressão do indicador do programa causadas por ** DataElement ** inválido ou ** TrackedEntityAttribute ** inválido.

### Expressão de filtro de indicador de programa inválida { #invalid-program-indicator-filter-expression } 

Relata todas as violações na expressão do filtro do indicador do programa causadas por ** DataElement ** inválido ou ** TrackedEntityAttribute ** inválido.

## Manutenção { #data_admin_maintenance }

Table: Data maintenance functions in the Data Administration app

| Função | Descrição |
|---|---|
| Clear analytics tables | Completely empties the analytics tables. These tables are used to generate aggregate data for the pivot tables, GIS and reports. |
| Remove zero data values | Removes zero data values from the database. Values registered for data elements with aggregation operator average is not removed, as such values will be significant when aggregating the data, contrary to values registered for data elements with aggregation operator sum.<br> <br>Reducing the number of data values will improve system performance. |
| Permanently remove soft deleted data values | When a data value is deleted in DHIS2, the system will mark the corresponding database row as deleted, and not actually delete the row.<br> <br>Running this maintenance function will physically remove these data value rows from the database. |
| Prune periods | Removes all periods which have no registered data values. Reducing the number of periods will improve system performance. |
| Remove expired invitations | Will delete users which represent user account invitations that now have gone past their expiry date. |
| Drop SQL views | DHIS2 lets you set up and manage SQL views as system objects with corresponding database SQL views.<br> <br>Running this maintenance function will drop underlying SQL views for all system views. Use the **Create SQL views** function to recreate these SQL views. |
| Create SQL views | Recreates all SQL views in the database. |
| Update category option combinations | Rebuilds the category option combinations. This may be required after altering the category options which belong to a given category. |
| Update organisation unit paths | The organisation unit table in the DHIS2 database has a column "path" which contains a concatenated string of all ancestors in the hierarchy for each organisation unit.<br> <br>Running this maintenance function will update and ensure that these values are in sync with the current organisation unit hierarchy. This column is managed by DHIS2, but a manual update might be useful when doing data loading directly in the database. |
| Clear application cache | Clears the system cache. |
| Recarregar aplicativos | Manually reloads and detects installed DHIS2 apps.<br> <br>The installed apps are also detected when the system starts and when installing or uninstall apps. |

## Resource tables { #data_admin_resource_tables }

Resource tables are supporting tables that are used during analysis of
data. One would typically join the contents of these tables with the
data value table when doing queries from third-party applications like
Microsoft Excel. They are also used extensively by the analysis modules
of DHIS2. Regeneration of the resource tables should only be done once
all data integrity issues are resolved. The resource tables are also
generated automatically, every time the analytics process is run by the
system.

  - Estrutura da unidade organizacional (\_orgunitstructure)

    This table should be regenerated any time there have been any
    changes made to the organisational unit hierarchy. This table
    provides information about the organisation unit hierarchy. It has
    one row for each organisation unit, one column for each organisation
    unit level and the organisation unit identifiers for all parents in
    the lineage as values.

  - Estrutura do conjunto de grupos de elementos de dados (\ _dataelementgroupsetstructure)

    This table provides information about which data elements are
    members of which data element group sets. The table has one row for
    each data element, one column for each data element group set and
    the names of the data element group as values.

  - Estrutura do conjunto de grupos de indicadores (\ _indicatorgroupsetstructure)

    This table provides information about which indicators are members
    of which indicator group sets. The table has one row for each
    indicator, one column for each indicator group set and the names of
    the indicator group as values.

  - Organisation unit group set structure
    (\_organisationunitgroupsetstructure)

    This table provides information about which organisation units are
    members of which organisation unit group sets. The table has one row
    for each organisation unit, one column for each organisation unit
    group set and the names of the organisation unit groups as values.

  - Estrutura da categoria (\ _estrutura da categoria)

    This table provides information about which data elements are
    members of which categories. The table has one row for each data
    element, one column for each category and the names of the category
    options as values.

  - Nome da combinação de opção de categoria de elemento de dados (\ _categoryoptioncomboname)

    This table should be regenerated any time there have been changes
    made to the category combination names. It contains readable names
    for the various combinations of categories.

  - Estrutura do elemento de dados (\ _dataelementstructure)

    This table provides information about all data elements and which
    period type (frequency) they capture data at. The period type is
    determined through the data set membership and hence relies on data
    elements to be member of data sets with similar period types to have
    a defined behaviour.

  - Date periods structure (\_dateperiodstructure)

    This table provides information about all periods and which period
    type they are associated with. For each period type with lower
    frequency than itself, it contains information about which period it
    will fall within.

  - Periods structure (\_periodstructure)

    Similar to `_dateperiodstructure`, containing a scoped set of
    periods more adapted for aggregated analytics.
    It's based on `period` and `periodtype` tables.

  - Data element category option combinations
    (\_dataelementcategoryoptioncombo)

    This table provides a mapping between data elements and all possible
    category option combinations.

  - Data set organisation unit category (\_datasetorganisationunitcategory)

    This table provides information related to data sets, organisation units
    and its category option combinations associated. If no association is found,
    it uses the default category option combo.


## Analytics tables management { #data_admin_analytics_tables }

DHIS2 generates database tables which the system then uses as basis for
various analytics functions. These tables are also valuable if you write
advanced SQL reports. In the **Data Administration** app, you can execute the tables
generation immediately. If you want to schedule them to be executed at regular intervals,
this can be done in the **Scheduler** app. This means that you can refresh recent analytics on
demand and see updated pivot tables without waiting for all of the past years data to
re-process.

> **Note**
>
> You can also generate the tables through the web API. This task is
> typically performed by a system administrator.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Data Administration ** e clique em ** Analytics Tables **.

2.  Selecione as partes do processo de análise que deseja ignorar:

      - ** Pule a geração de tabelas de recursos **

      - ** Pule a geração de dados agregados e dados de integridade **

      - ** Pule a geração de dados do evento **

      - ** Pular geração de dados de inscrição **

      - **Skip generation of organisation unit ownership data**

3.  Selecione ** Número dos últimos anos de dados a serem incluídos **.

4.  Clique em ** Iniciar exportação **.

## Data statistics { #data_admin__data_statistics }

The data statistics module provides an overview of the number of objects
stored in the DHIS2 database.


![](resources/images/maintenance/data_stats.png)

The total number of each type of object is presented in a series of
tables with summary statistics of each object.

## Lock exceptions { #data_admin__lock_exception }

Lock exceptions provide fine-grained control over exemption from a
locked data set. After the expiry of the data set, data entry will be
denied by default, unless an exception has been granted through the Lock
exception interface.

### Adding a lock exception { #adding-a-lock-exception } 

By granting a lock exception, data entry will be enabled even after the
expiry period of the data set has passed.

1. Open the **Data Administration** app and click **Lock Exception**.
2. Click **Add lock exception** at the top of the page
3. Select the desired data set, organisation units and time period (see
   screenshot below)
4. Click **Add lock exception**

![](resources/images/maintenance/create_lock_exception.png)

In the example above, a data lock exception would be created for "Bo" for the
"ART monthly summary" dataset for "February 2014".

## Min-Max Value Generation { #data_admin_min_max_value_generation }

This administrative function can be used to generate min-max values,
which are used as part of the data quality and validation process for
specific organization units and data sets. Simply select the dataset
from the left hand frame, and then select the required organisation
units to generate the min-max values for from the organisational units
selector on the right. Press the "Generate" button to generate or
regenerate all min-max values. Press "Remove" to remove all min-max
values which are currently stored in the database.

![](resources/images/maintenance/min_max_value_generation.png)

## Cache Statistics { #data_admin_cache_statistics }

This option is for system administrators only to use. The cache
statistics shows the status of the application level cache. The
application level cache refers to the objects and query results that the
application is caching in order to speed up performance. If the database
has been modified directly the application cache needs to be cleared for
it to take effect.



# Visualize estatísticas de uso { #using_usage_analytics }

## Sobre o aplicativo de análise de uso { #about-the-usage-analytics-app } 

![](resources/images/usage_analytics_interface.png)

The **Usage Analytics** app lets you visualize statistics on how users
are working with the **Dashboard**, **GIS**, **Event
Visualizer**, **Data Visualizer** and **Event Reports** apps within
DHIS2. With this statistics you can answers questions such as:

-   How many times people have loaded visualizations and dashboards?

-   Quantos favoritos os usuários criaram?

-   Quantos usuários estão fazendo login em relação ao número total de usuários?

-   Quais são os favoritos mais vistos?

## Crie um gráfico de análise de uso { #usage_analytics_create_chart }

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Usage Analytics **.

2.  Selecione uma ** Data de início ** e ** Data de término **.

3.  Selecione um ** Intervalo **: dia, semana, mês ou ano.

4.  Selecione uma **categoria**.

    Existem cinco categorias de análise:

    -   **Favorite views**: Provides the number of times various types
        of favorites have been viewed, such as visualizations and
        dashboards, over time. This analysis lets you switch between all
        types of favorites, the total across all types and the average
        number of views.

    -   **Favorites**: Provides the number of favorites which have been
        created and stored in the system over time.

    -   **Users**: Provides the number of active as well as total number
        of users over time.

    -   **Top favorites**: Shows the most viewed favorites in the system
        by type.

    -   **Data values**: Provides the number of data values stored in
        the system over time.

5.  Clique em ** Actualizar **.



# Datastore Manager { #datastore_manager_app } 

The Datastore Manager is intended for advanced-level DHIS2 users. Before
you use the Datastore Manager, you can read more about the Data store
here: [DHIS2 data
store](https://docs.dhis2.org/master/en/developer/html/webapi_data_store.html).

## Usando o Datastore Manager { #using-the-datastore-manager } 

The Datastore Manager lets you manage the content of the web API data
stores. This is helpful when managing apps and external scripts.

## Adicione um novo namespace e chave ao Datastore Manager { #add-a-new-namespace-and-key-to-the-datastore-manager } 

Observação: você deve criar um namespace antes de adicionar uma chave a ele.

1.  Clique em ** Novo **.

2.  Digite um nome para o namespace que deseja criar.

3.  Enter a key name, and select **Create**. The new namespace displays
    in the left pane.

## Adicione uma chave a um namespace existente no Datastore Manager { #add-a-key-to-an-existing-namespace-in-the-datastore-manager } 

Para adicionar uma nova chave a um namespace existente no Datastore Manager,

1.  Selecione o namespace ao qual deseja adicionar uma chave.

2.  Clique no menu de opções e clique em ** Nova chave **.

    ![](resources/images/datastore_manager/datamgr_add_key.png)

3.  Insira um nome de chave na caixa de diálogo Nova chave.

4.  Click **Create**. The new key is added to the namespace you
    selected.

## Exclua um namespace ou chave do Datastore Manager { #delete-a-namespace-or-key-from-the-datastore-manager } 

To delete a namespace, or key, click the Options menu, and then click
**Delete**, and then **Delete** again. Note that if you delete the only
key in a namespace, you will also delete the namespace it belongs to.

## Procure por namespaces ou chaves { #search-for-namespaces-or-keys } 

Use the search tool in the top left corner to search for namespaces and
keys as follows:

  - Enter a namespace name followed by **\#** and the key name to search
    for a specific key in a namespace.

  - Enter **\#** followed by the name of a key to search for keys
only.

![](resources/images/datastore_manager/datamgr_search_namespaces_keys.png)

## Pesquise sua biblioteca JSON { #search-your-json-library } 

Use the search tool in the workspace toolbar to search your JSON
library.

![](resources/images/datastore_manager/datamgr_searchJSON.png)

## Edite namespaces ou chaves no Datastore Manager { #edit-namespaces-or-keys-in-the-datastore-manager } 

Use the **Search** tool to find namespaces or keys in your datastore.
When you edit your content, you can toggle between the **Tree** view and
the **Code** view. Use the **Tree** view to get an overview of the
contents of the Datastore. Use the **Code** view to edit your code
directly in the code editor. Remember to save your work by clicking the
**Save** button.

![](resources/images/datastore_manager/datamgr_treeview.png)

In the Code view, you can edit your code. When you edit a line of code,
it is highlighted in yellow.

![](resources/images/datastore_manager/datamgr_codeview.png)

Any errors are marked by the editor. If you hover over the error icon,
you can view a short description of the error.

![](resources/images/datastore_manager/datamgr_editcode_error.png)




# Agendamento { #scheduling } 

The Scheduler is an application for managing background jobs in DHIS2.
Background jobs can do a number of tasks, such as running analytics,
synchronizing data and meta data, or sending a push analysis report. The
application provides the ability to create, modify and delete such jobs.

The Scheduler comes bundled with DHIS2 and is accessed through the App
Menu.

![The start page of the Scheduler app](resources/images/scheduler/overview.png)

The start page of the Scheduler app shows an overview of existing jobs.
By default, pre-defined system jobs are hidden. To view these, click
*Include system jobs in list* in the top right corner.

When you create or modify a job, it will be scheduled according to
the selected schedule. To run a job on demand, go to the job list,
click the "Actions" button of the job you want to run and click
"Run manually". This action is only available for enabled jobs.

## Criar um emprego { #scheduling_create_job } 

1.  Open the **Scheduler** app and click the "New job" button in the top
    right corner.

1.  Escolha um ** Nome ** adequado para o novo trabalho.

1.  Select the **Job type** you want to schedule using the
    drop-down menu.

1.  Select a schedule for the job. Each job type has its own scheduling type,
    either **Cron** scheduling or **Delay** scheduling.

    1.  For **Cron** scheduled job types you can set a schedule using the 
        [Spring scheduling](https://docs.spring.io/spring/docs/current/javadoc-api/org/springframework/scheduling/support/CronSequenceGenerator.html) 
        syntax. You can also select a predefined **Cron expression** by clicking
        "Choose from preset times". This schedule will only start a new job run
        if the previous job run has finished, to prevent the system from spawning
        too many jobs.

    1.  For **Delay** scheduled jobs you can set a delay in seconds. Unlike the
        **Cron** scheduled jobs, these jobs aren't executed according to a set 
        schedule, but with a specific delay in between job runs. The delay timer
        starts when a job ends, starting a new job run when the delay timer reaches
        zero. This will continue as long as the job is enabled.

1.  If the job type is customizable, a **Parameters** section will appear below
    the scheduling settings. These additional options specify the details of the
    scheduled job, and will vary depending on the job type.

1.  Press the **Save** button to confirm the job creation. On successful job
    creation you will be redirected to the job overview, where the newly
    created job will now be listed.

![Creating a new scheduler job](resources/images/scheduler/add_new_job.png)

Newly created jobs are enabled by default.

## Editing a job { #scheduling_configure_job } 

With the proper permissions, you can modify the details of user-created
jobs. To quickly enable or disable a user created job from running, use the
switches in the **On/off** column on the landing page of the Scheduler app.
Note that system jobs are always enabled and cannot be disabled.

Further editing of user jobs:

1.  Click the "Actions" button of the job you want to edit and click "Edit" (only
    user jobs can be edited).

1.  When done editing, press the **Save** button to persist the changes.

## Excluindo um trabalho { #dataAdmin_scheduler_delete } 

1.  Click the "Actions" button of the job you want to delete and click "Delete"
    (only user jobs can be deleted).

1.  Confirme pressionando ** Delete ** novamente na janela pop-up.

User jobs can also be deleted from the editing screen.

![Deleting a scheduler job](resources/images/scheduler/delete_job.png)

## Tipos de trabalho { #job-types } 

A seção a seguir descreve os vários tipos de trabalho.

### Disable Inactive Users { #scheduling_disable_inactive_users } 
Users that have not been active - not logged in - for a number of months can automatically be disabled.
Select the number of inactive months as the job parameter.
All users that have not logged in for that number of months or longer will be disabled by the job.
Disabled users will no longer be able to log into the system.

The _Reminder days before_ parameter can be set to send a reminder email to
those users the specified number of days before their account is due to expire.
If users do not log in further reminder emails are sent each halving the 
previous number of days. For example if the number of days is set to 7 the 
first email is sent 7 days in advance, the second 3 days and the third and 
last 1 day in advance.
If the value is not set (blank) no reminder is sent.


### Tabela de recursos { #scheduling_resource_table } 

A tarefa da tabela de recursos é responsável por gerar e atualizar as tabelas do banco de dados de recursos. Essas tabelas são usadas por vários componentes no DHIS 2 e têm como objetivo simplificar as consultas no banco de dados.

Observe que, ao especificar qualquer um dos trabalhos da tabela analítica, as tabelas de recursos podem fazer parte do processo e não é necessário especificar também um trabalho da tabela de recursos.

### Tabela analítica { #scheduling_analytics_table } 

A tarefa de tabelas analíticas é responsável por gerar e atualizar as tabelas analíticas. As tabelas analíticas são usadas como base para as consultas analíticas de dados no DHIS2. Aplicativos como painel, visualizador e mapas recuperam dados dessas tabelas por meio da API de análise DHIS2 e devem ser atualizados para que os dados analíticos se tornem disponíveis. Você pode agendar esse processo para ser executado regularmente por meio de um tipo de trabalho de tabela de análise.

O trabalho da tabela de análise irá, por padrão, preencher os dados de todos os anos e elementos de dados. Os seguintes parâmetros estão disponíveis:

- ** Últimos anos: ** O número dos últimos anos para preencher as tabelas analíticas. Por exemplo, se você especificar 2 anos, o processo atualizará os dados dos dois últimos anos, mas não atualizará os dados mais antigos. Este parâmetro é útil para reduzir o tempo que o processo leva para ser concluído e é apropriado se os dados mais antigos não foram alterados e quando se deseja atualizar os dados mais recentes.
- ** Ignorar tabelas de recursos: ** Ignorar tabelas de recursos durante o processo de atualização da tabela de análise. Isso reduz o tempo que o processo leva para ser concluído, mas faz com que as alterações nos metadados não sejam refletidas nos dados analíticos.
- ** Ignorar tipos de tabela: ** Ignorar um ou mais tipos de tabela de análise. Isso reduz o tempo que o processo leva para ser concluído, mas faz com que esses tipos de dados não sejam atualizados nos dados analíticos.

### Tabela de análise contínua { #scheduling_continuous_analytics_table } 

A tarefa de tabelas analíticas é responsável por gerar e atualizar as tabelas analíticas. As tabelas analíticas são usadas como base para as consultas analíticas de dados no DHIS2. Aplicativos como painel, visualizador e mapas recuperam dados dessas tabelas por meio da API de análise DHIS2 e devem ser atualizados para que os dados analíticos se tornem disponíveis. Você pode agendar esse processo para ser executado regularmente por meio de um tipo de trabalho de tabela de análise.

O trabalho de tabela de análise contínua é baseado em duas fases:

- _Atualização mais recente: _ Atualização dos dados mais recentes, onde mais recente se refere aos dados que foram adicionados, atualizados ou removidos desde a última vez que os dados mais recentes ou os dados completos foram atualizados. Este processo acontecerá freqüentemente.
- _Atualização completa: _ Atualização de todos os dados ao longo de todos os anos. Este processo acontecerá uma vez por dia.

O trabalho da tabela de análise contínua freqüentemente atualiza os dados mais recentes. O processo de dados mais recente utiliza uma partição de banco de dados especial que é usada para conter apenas os dados mais recentes. Essa partição pode ser atualizada rapidamente devido à quantidade relativamente pequena de dados. A partição aumentará de tamanho até que uma atualização completa seja realizada. Uma vez por dia, todos os dados de todos os anos serão atualizados. Isso limpará a partição mais recente.

O trabalho da tabela de análise irá, por padrão, preencher os dados de todos os anos e elementos de dados. Os seguintes parâmetros estão disponíveis:

- ** Hora do dia de atualização completa: ** A hora do dia em que a atualização completa será feita. Por exemplo, se você especificar 1, a atualização completa será realizada à 1h.
- ** Últimos anos: ** O número dos últimos anos para preencher as tabelas analíticas. Por exemplo, se você especificar 2 anos, o processo atualizará os dados dos dois últimos anos, mas não atualizará os dados mais antigos. Este parâmetro é útil para reduzir o tempo que o processo leva para ser concluído e é apropriado se os dados mais antigos não foram alterados e quando se deseja atualizar os dados mais recentes.
- ** Ignorar tabelas de recursos: ** Ignorar tabelas de recursos durante o processo de atualização da tabela de análise. Isso reduz o tempo que o processo leva para ser concluído, mas faz com que as alterações nos metadados não sejam refletidas nos dados analíticos.

### Tracker search optimization { #scheduling_tracker_search_optimization } 

The tracker search optimization job is responsible for generating and updating the trigram indexes for relevant tracked entity attributes. Trigram indexes improve the performance of searching tracked entity instances based on specific tracked entity attribute values. The usefulness of trigram indexes depends on whether the tracked entity attribute is configured as unique or if they are configured as searchable (when connected to program/tracked entity type). You can configure the job to choose which tracked entity attributes should be trigram indexed. The job also takes care of deleting any obsolete indexes that have been created earlier but are no more required due to change in metadata configuration. 

The following parameters are available:

- **Attributes:** The list of attributes that needs a trigram index created. For each attribute, a partial trigram index will be created. As an example, if you specify "firstname" and "lastname" attribute, the process will create two separate trigram indexes for the corresponding attributes "firstname" and "lastname". Note that, if the attribute provided in this parameter is not indexable (either because they are not unique or not searchable), such attributes are simply ignored by the process and no trigram index will be created for them. 
- **Skip index deletion:** Skip obsolete index deletion during the trigram index process. If set to true, indexes that are deemed obsolete will not be deleted.

### Sincronização de dados { #scheduling_data_sync } 

DHIS2 provides synchronisation of data between remotely distributed
instances and a central instance of DHIS2. This can be useful e.g. when
you have deployed multiple stand-alone instances of DHIS2 which are
required to submit data values to a central DHIS2 instance. Both tracker
data and aggregate data synchronization is supported.

Estas são as etapas para ativar a sincronização de dados:

- Go to Synchronization Settings, enter the remote server URL,
  username and password. Press the TAB button to automatically save
  the new password. Refresh the page and check that the filled values
  are still present. Note that the password field will be empty after
  the refresh, since this value is encrypted, so you can consider it
  saved.

- Using the Scheduler app, create a new job using the "Event Programs 
  Data Sync" and/or "Tracker Programs Data Sync" job type. Make sure it 
  is enabled when you finish. (Note: If the "Program Data Synchronization" 
  job, available in previous versions, was set up in Scheduler app before, 
  it was automatically replaced by the two new jobs "Event Programs Data Sync" 
  and "Tracker Programs Data Sync" with the identical settings. )

Alguns aspectos do recurso de sincronização de dados devem ser considerados:

- The local DHIS2 instance will store the password of the user account
  on the remote instance encrypted in the local database. The remote
  account is used for authentication when transferring data. For
  security purposes make sure you set the _encryption.password_
  configuration parameter in _hibernate.properties_ to a strong
  password.

- Deploying the remote server on SSL/HTTPS is strongly recommended as
  the username and password are sent in clear text using basic
  authentication and could be intercepted by an attacker.

- The data synchronization uses the UID property of data elements,
  category option combos and organisation units to match the
  meta-data. Hence the synchronization is dependent on these three
  meta-data objects being harmonized on the local and remote instance
  in order to work appropriately.

- The first time DHIS2 runs the synchronization job, it will include
  any data available. The subsequent synchronization jobs will only
  include data added and changed since the last successful job. A
  synchronization job is considered successful only if all the data
  was saved successfully on the remote server (Any data successfully
  synced will remain on the receiving instance, regardless if the job
  eventually fails). Whether the job was successful or not can be
  decided from the import summary returned from the central server.

- The initial synchronization job may take a significant amount of
  time, possibly slowing down your instance, depending on how much
  data is being synchronized. It could be a good idea to configure the
  job to run when there are few online users, then later change this
  to your own preference. If you do not want or need to synchronize all 
  the data, there is a possibility to <a href="#skip_changed_before">skip 
  some of the data being synchronised</a>.

  When DHIS2 synchronizes tracker data, it determines the set of data
  to synchronize based on the last time it was synchronized. Each of
  the tracked entity instances and events have their own records of
  when they where last successfully synchronized.

- The system will start a synchronization job based on the rules set
  in the configuration of the job. If the synchronization job starts
  while there is no connection to the remote server, it will retry up
  to three times before it aborts. The job will run again at a
  scheduled time.

- The server handles each set of programs separately, which means one
  set of programs can be synchronized successfully, while the other
  fails. The failure or success of one doesn't influence the other, as
  the last successful synchronization time is tracked individually for
  each item as previously mentioned.

- The attributes of TrackedEntityInstances (TrackedEntityAttribute)
  and the data elements of ProgramStages (ProgramStageDataElement)
  which have an option "Skip synchronization" turned on will not be
  synchronized. This feature allows you to decide to not synchronize
  some sensitive or not relevant data and to keep them only locally.

- The authority `Ignore validation of required fields in Tracker and Event Capture`
  (`F\_IGNORE\_TRACKER\_REQUIRED\_VALUE\_VALIDATION`) should be used when
  there is a requirement that some mandatory attribute / data element
  has at the same time a "Skip synchronization" property turned on.
  Such a setting will lead to validation failure on the central server
  as the given attribute / data element will not be present in the
  payload.

  The validation won't fail for the user with this authority. The
  authority should be assigned to the user, on the central server,
  that will be used for synchronization job.

- In specific cases, **the initial synchronization of all the data can be undesirable**; 
  for example, when a database on the local instance is a fresh copy of the 
  database present on the central instance, or when it is preferred to not 
  synchronize old data in favor of initial synchronization taking less 
  time. 

  The *syncSkipSyncForDataChangedBefore* SettingKey can be used to skip 
  the synchronisation of all the data (data values, Event and Tracker 
  program data, complete data set registrations) that were *last 
  changed before the specified date*. The `SettingKey` is used in the 
  synchronization job all the time. Therefore, if you need to synchronize 
  the old data, you should change the `SettingKey`.

- Both Tracker Programs and Event Programs synchronization job supports 
  paging in order to avoid timeouts and to deal with unstable network.
  Default page size for "Event Programs Data Sync" job is set to 60. 
  Default page size for "Tracker Programs Data Sync" job is set to 20.

  If default values do not fit your purpose, own page size can be specified 
  via parameter in particular sync job in Scheduler app.

### Programação de sincronização de metadados { #scheduling_metadata_sync } 

DHIS2 provides a feature for synchronizing meta data from a remote
instance to a local instance of DHIS2. This can be useful when you have
deployed multiple stand-alone instances of DHIS2 and you need to create
meta data in all the local instances similar to the central DHIS2
instance.

Estas são as etapas para ativar a sincronização de metadados:

- Go to Settings \> Synchronization, enter the remote server URL,
  username and password and click Save.

- Go to Metadata administration \> Scheduling. Under Metadata
  synchronization set strategy to Enabled, select the time-period and
  click Start.

Alguns aspectos do recurso de sincronização de metadados a serem considerados:

- The local DHIS2 instance will store the password of the user account
  of the remote instance in its database. The remote user account is
  used for authentication when transferring/downloading data. For
  security purposes make sure you set the _encryption.password_
  configuration parameter in _hibernate.properties_ to a strong
  password.

- Deploying the remote server on SSL/HTTPS is strongly recommended as
  the username and password are sent in clear text using basic
  authentication and could be intercepted by an attacker.

- Also ensure that the remote user is not having ALL authority,
  instead simply create a user with F\_METADATA\_MANAGE authority so
  that even if these details are intercepted by a hacker, one cannot
  have full control of the remote system.

- The meta data synchronization relies on the underlying import layer.
  Each meta data version is an export of meta data between two given
  timestamps. Each sync of meta data version is an attempt to import
  that meta data snapshot into the local instance. The sync of
  versions is incremental. The local instance will try to download the
  meta data versions from the central instance one after the other.
  Failure to sync a specific meta data version will not let the sync
  proceed to further versions. In case of failures, appropriate
  changes must be made to meta data at central to ensure that the
  error gets resolved. Metadata configuration is critical and the
  user should be careful while rolling out the updates to the
  production. It's always recommended to have staging environments in
  place to ensure the sanity of the meta data versions and their
  impact thereafter. The local instance will sync the meta data from
  first version so that harmony is maintained and local and central
  instance will work appropriately.

- The system will attempt a synchronization at the scheduled time. If
  the local or remote server does not have a working Internet
  connection at the time, the synchronization will be aborted and
  re-attempted after as per the retry count as mentioned in the
  _dhis.conf_ file.

- You can see the time of last successful synchronization with remote
  server in the scheduling screen next to the "Last success" label.

### Predictor { #scheduling_predictor } 

This runs selected predictors and/or predictor groups.

The relative start and end parameters determine the periods in
which data will be predicted, corresponding to the date on which the
predictor job is run:

- **Relative start** counts the days from the job date to the
earliest date on which a predicted period may start. It can be positive
or negative. For example, a value of 3 means predict into periods that
start at least 3 days after the predictor run. A value of -3 means
predict into periods that start at least 3 days before the predictor run.

- **Relative end** counts the days from the job date to the
latest date on which a predicted period may end. It can be positive
or negative. For example, a value of 9 means predict into periods that
end at least 9 days after the predictor run. A value of -9 means
predict into periods that end at least 9 days before the predictor run.

Setting these values can give you very flexible control over when
predictions will be made, especially if your predictor job is set to
run daily or more frequently. Before you set these values, you should
think carefully about when you want predictions for a period to start
being made, and when you want them to stop being made. Then you
need to compute the appropriate relative start
and end dates.

Examples:

1. **Requirement**: A predictor uses data from the same week
as the predicted value. (No past sampled data are used.)
After the week ends on Sunday, you expect the data
to be entered in the following two days (Monday and Tuesday).
You don't want to start predicting data until Wednesday after the
week ends because you don't want partial results to be shown.
However, data may still be adjusted on Wednesday, so you want to
update the predictions also on Thursday. After that, the
data are frozen and you don't want to predict for that period anymore.

    **Solution:** For a job running daily or more frequently, define the
    relative start as -10 and the relative end as -2 (for periods
    within 10 to 2 days before the job runs).

    - Before Wednesday of the following week, the period end is
    greater than 2 days before, so no predictions are made.

    - On Wednesday of the following week, the period started 9 days
    before and ended 2 days before. Predictions are made because -9 to -2
    are within the range -10 to -2.

    - On Thursday of the following week, the period started 10 days
    before and ended 3 days before. Predictions are made because -10 to -3
    are within the range -10 to -2.

    - After Thursday, the previous week started more than
    10 days before, so no predictions are made.

    - Predictions are made only on Wednesday and Thursday. On Friday through
    Tuesday, no predictions are made (and the job finishes very quickly).

2. **Requirement**: A predictor is used to forecast a limit (average plus twice
the standard deviation)
for expected non-seasonally varying disease cases based on data from the
previous five weeks. Weeks are Monday through Sunday. Predictions should start
being made from the previous Tuesday, using available data at that time, and
continue being made through Tuesday of the week that the predictions are being
made for (by which time it is assumed that the previous week's data are final).

    **Solution:** For a job running daily or more frequently,
    define the relative start as -1 and the relative end as 12.

    - Before Tuesday, predictions will not be made for the following week because it
    ends more than 12 days later.

    - On Tuesday, predictions will be made for the following week which starts
    in 6 days and ends in 12 days.

    - On Wednesday through the following Tuesday, predictions will be made for
    the week whose start-to-end dates are Wed: 5 to 11, Thu: 4 to 10,
    Fri: 3 to 9, Sat: 2 to 8, Sun: 1 to 7, Mon: 0 to 6, and Tue: -1 to 5.

    - Note that on Tuesday, predictions are made for the current week with
    start-to-end dates -1 to 5, and also for the following week
    with start-to-end dates 6 to 12. On all other days of the week
    predictions are made for one week.

You can select which predictors and predictor groups will run during the job:

- **Predictors** runs individual predictors.
They run in the order added.

- **Predictor groups** runs predictor groups.
They run in the order added. The predictors within each group run in the
order of their names (comparing Unicode character values).

If both individual predictors and predictor groups are selected in the same
job, the individual predictors run first, followed by the predictor groups.



# Importar / Exportar aplicativo { #import_export }

In a primary health system, the HMIS typically involves a distributed
application, where the same application is running in different
geographical locations (PHCs,CHCs, hospitals, districts, and state).
Many of these physical locations do not have Internet connectivity, and
hence they work off-line. At some point (normally at the district
level), the data needs to be synchronised in order to have a
consolidated database for the a particular geographical region. For
this, it is important to be able to export data from one location (which
is working offline, say at the health facility level) and import into
another one (say at the district level).
This feature of exporting and importing is thus a crucial function of a HMIS.
This feature also helps us overcome the dependency on the Internet to some
degree, as data updates can be transferred via USB key where there is no
connectivity, or through email where there is limited Internet
connectivity. DHIS2 provides robust export-import functionality to
fulfil these needs.

To access the Import/Export app, search in the top header bar for
Import/Export. Import/Export app offers a number of services details for
which can be found below.

![](resources/images/import_export/overview.png)

## Importando dados { #importing_data }

### Registrador de progresso de importação { #import_progress_logger }

No matter what you import ("Data", "Events", "Org unit geometry", "Metadata" or
"Tracked Entity Instances" data), you can always view the progress of
the import by looking at the "Job Summary" at the top of the page.

### Importar Resumos { #metadata_import_summaries }

On import request completion, we show import summaries above the
import form. Any conflicts or errors are shown in the table under the
main summary for the import.

![](resources/images/import_export/import_summary.png)

### Importação de Metadados { #metadata_import }

Metadata Import can be accessed from the sidebar by clicking on
Metadata Import.

![](resources/images/import_export/metadata_import.png)

1.  Escolha um arquivo para fazer upload

2.  Select a format: _JSON_ , _CSV_, or _XML_

3.  Select the appropriate settings for:

    - Identifier
    - Modo de importação de relatório
    - Modo de pré-aquecimento
    - Estratégia de importação
    - Modo atômico
    - Modo de fusão

4.  Click **Advanced options** if you want to adjust one or more of
    the following settings before importing:

    - Modo de descarga
    - Pular compartilhamento
    - Pular validação
    - Assíncrono
    - Estratégia inclusiva

5.  Click on the **Import** button which will upload the file and start the
    importing process.

> **Tip**
>
> **It is highly recommend to use the Dry run option** to test before
> importing data; to make sure you keep control over any changes to your
> Metadata, and to check for problems with out-of-sync data elements or
> organisation unit names

> **Note**
>
> If an organisation unit e.g. `Nduvuibu MCHP` had a unknown reference to an object with ID `aaaU6Kr7Gtpidn`, it means that the object with ID `aaaU6Kr7Gtpidn` was not present in your imported file, and it was not found in the existing database.
>
> You can control this using **Identifier** option, to indicate if you want to allow objects with such invalid references to be imported or not. If you choose to import invalid references you will have to correct the reference manually in DHIS2 later.

#### Identificadores correspondentes em DXF2 { #matching_identifiers_in_dxf2 }

The DXF2 format currently support matching for two identifiers, the
internal DHIS2 identifier (known as a UID), and also using an external
identifier called called a "code". When the importer is trying to search
for references (like the one above), it will first go to the UID field,
and then to the code field. This allows you to import from legacy
systems without having a UID for every meta-data object. I.e. if you are
importing facility data from a legacy system, you can leave out the ID
field completely (DHIS2 will fill this in for you) and put the
legacy system's own identifiers in the code field, this identifier is
required to be unique. This not only works for organisation units, but
for all kinds of meta-data, allowing for easy import from other systems.

### Importação de Dados { #import }

Data Import can be accessed from the sidebar by clicking on Data
Import.

![](resources/images/import_export/data_import.png)

1.  Escolha um arquivo para fazer upload

2.  Select a format: _JSON_, _CSV_, _XML_, _ADX_, or _PDF_

3.  Select the appropriate settings for:

    - Estratégia
    - Cache de pré-aquecimento

4.  Click **Advanced options** if you want to adjust one or more of
    the following settings before importing:

    - Data element ID scheme
    - Org unit ID scheme
    - ID scheme
    - Pular verificação existente

5.  Click on the **Import** button which will upload the file and start the
    importing process.

> **Tip**
>
> **It is highly recommend to use the Dry run option** to test before
> importing data; to make sure you keep control over any changes to your
> Metadata, and to check for problems with out-of-sync data elements or
> organisation unit names

#### Dados PDF { #importPDFdata }

DHIS2 supports import of data in the PDF format. This can be used to
import data produced by off-line PDF data entry forms. Please refer to
the section **Data set management** for details on how to produce a PDF
form which can be used for off-line data entry.

To import a PDF data file, navigate to the _PDF Data Import_ item in the
side menu. Upload the completed PDF file and click _Import_.

### Importação de Evento { #event_import }

Event Import can be accessed from the sidebar by clicking on Event
Import.

![](resources/images/import_export/event_import.png)

1.  Select a format: _JSON_ , _CSV_, or _XML_

2.  Click **Advanced options** if you want to adjust one or more of
    the following settings before importing:

    - Event ID scheme
    - Data element ID scheme
    - Org unit ID scheme
    - ID scheme

3.  Click on the **Import** button which will upload the file and start the
    importing process.

### Earth Engine Import { #ee_import }

Earth Engine Import can be accessed from the sidebar by clicking on Earth Engine
Import.

Import high resolution population data from WorldPop using Google Earth Engine. A [Google
Earth Engine account](https://docs.dhis2.org/en/topics/tutorials/google-earth-engine-sign-up.html) is required to use this importer.

![](resources/images/import_export/ee_import.png)

#### Select which Earth Engine data should be imported { #select-which-earth-engine-data-should-be-imported } 

The first section of the form is used to configure the Earth Engine data to import.

1. Select which Earth Engine dataset should be imported. Currently the choices are *Population* and *Population age groups*.

2. After a dataset has been selected, a period must be selected. Only one period can be imported at a time.

3. Choose how the data should be rounded. By default data is not rounded.

4. Select which organisation units to import data to. If you select facility level organisation units, then you must choose an associated geometry for the facilities. Without an associated geometry for facilities, the Earth Engine cannot determine the population.

![](resources/images/import_export/ee_ou_associated_geometry.png)

#### Select the data elements to import the Earth Engine data into { #select-the-data-elements-to-import-the-earth-engine-data-into } 

Once you have configured the Earth Engine dataset, you need to select which data element to import the data to. For datasets with disaggregation groups, such as "Population age groups", the DHIS2 data element must have disaggregations in the form of category option combos that match the Earth Engine dataset disaggregation groups.

![](resources/images/import_export/ee_group_coc_mapping.png)

> **Configuring data elements for Earth Engine import**
>
> When configuring the DHIS2 data elements that will contain Earth Engine data, if you plan to import data to multiple org unit levels, ensure that those levels are added as Aggregation Levels in the data element configuration.
>
> Some Earth Engine datasets contain disaggregation groups, the DHIS2 data element must be configured with corresponding category option combos. For example the "Population age groups" dataset is disaggregated by gender (Male, Female) and 5-year age groups.
>
> In DHIS2 this means that you must have a Male/Female category, and a 5-year age group category (<1yr, 1-4yr, 5-9yr, 10-14yr... 80+yr). These are combined into a category combination.
>
> Pro-tip: To automatically match the category option combo to the Earth Engine disaggregation group, add a Code to each category option combo that matches the earth engine group name. For example, with "Population age groups", the groups are named: F_0, F_1, F_5..., M_0, M_1, M_5...

#### Run the import { #run-the-import } 

Once the data element and category option combos have been selected, the Preview button is enabled. After reviewing the data you want to import, you can do a dry run first, or proceed with the actual import.

![](resources/images/import_export/ee_data_preview.png)

### Organisation Unit Geometry Import { #geometry_import }

Accessed from the sidebar by clicking on _Org Unit geometry import_. Two
geometry formats are supported: GeoJSON and GML. GeoJSON is the
recommended format and can also be used to import associated geometries
(catchment areas).

#### GeoJSON import { #geojson_import }

![](resources/images/import_export/geojson_import.png)

1.  Upload a file using the GeoJSON format.

2.  By default the GeoJSON feature id should match the organisation unit id.

3.  Check **Match GeoJSON property to organisation unit scheme** to match by
    a feature propery. Type the GeoJSON property name and select the
    Organisation unit ID scheme (_Id_, _Code_ or _Name_).

4.  Check **Import as associated geometry** to import the GeoJSON features
    as associated geometries the organisation units (e.g. catchment areas).
    Select at geometry attribute where the data should be imported. This requires
    an attribure of type _GeoJSON_ applied to _Organisatiot unit_. This
    attribute can be defined in the Maintenance app.

5.  Click on the **Start import** button which will upload the file and start the
    importing process.

> **Tip**
>
> **It is highly recommend to use the Dry run option** to test before
> importing data; to make sure you keep control over any changes to
> your organisation unit geometries.

#### GML import { #gml_import }

![](resources/images/import_export/gml_import.png)

1.  Upload a file using the GML (Geographic Markup Language) format.

2.  Click on the **Import** button which will upload the file and start the
    importing process.

### Tracked Entity Instances Import { #tei_import }

Tracked Entity Instances Import can be accessed from the sidebar by
clicking on TEI Import.

![](resources/images/import_export/tei_import.png)

1.  Escolha um arquivo para fazer upload

2.  Select a format: _JSON_ or _XML_

3.  Select the appropriate settings for:

    - Identifier
    - Modo de importação de relatório
    - Modo de pré-aquecimento
    - Estratégia de importação
    - Modo atômico
    - Modo de fusão

4.  Click **Advanced options** if you want to adjust one or more of
    the following settings before importing:

    - Modo de descarga
    - Pular compartilhamento
    - Pular validação
    - Estratégia inclusiva

5.  Click on the **Import** button which will upload the file and start the
    importing process.

> **Tip**
>
> **It is highly recommend to use the Dry run option** to test before
> importing data; to make sure you keep control over any changes to
> your Tracked Entity Instances.

## Exportando dados { #exporting-data } 

### Exportação de Metadados { #metadata_export }

Metadata export can be accessed from the sidebar by clicking on
Metadata export.

![](resources/images/import_export/metadata_export.png)

1.  Escolha a lista de objetos que deseja exportar.

2.  Select a format: *JSON*

3.  Select a compression type: _zip_, _gzip_ or _uncompressed_

4.  Decide whether to check _Skip sharing and access settings_

5.  Click **Export metadata** which will open a new web-browser window
    that will give you a file to download to your local computer.

### Exportação de metadados com dependências { #metadata_export_dependencies }

Metadata export with dependencies lets you create canned exports for
metadata objects. This type of export will include the metadata objects
and the metadata object's related objects; that is, the metadata which
belong together with the main object.

Table: Object types and their dependencies

| Object type          | Dependencies included in export                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| -------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| ** Conjuntos de dados **        | Data elements<br> <br>Sections<br> <br>Indicators<br> <br>Indicator types<br> <br>Attributes<br> <br>Data entry forms<br> <br>Legend sets<br> <br>Legends<br> <br>Category combinations<br> <br>Categories<br> <br>Category options<br> <br>Category option combinations<br> <br>Option sets                                                                                              |
| Programas             | Data entry form<br> <br>Tracked entity<br> <br>Program stages<br> <br>Program attributes<br> <br>Program indicators<br> <br>Program rules<br> <br>Program rule actions<br> <br>Program rule variables<br> <br>Program attributes<br> <br>Data elements<br> <br>Category combinations<br> <br>Categories<br> <br>Category options<br> <br>Category option combinations<br> <br>Option sets |
| Category combination | Category combinations<br> <br>Categories<br> <br>Category options<br> <br>Category option combinations<br> <br>Attributes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| painel de controle            | Dashboard items<br> <br>Charts<br> <br>Event charts<br> <br>Pivot tables<br> <br>Event reports<br> <br>Maps<br> <br>Reports<br> <br>Resources                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| Grupos de elementos de dados  | Data elements<br> <br>Category combinations<br> <br>Categories<br> <br>Category options<br> <br>Category option combinations<br> <br>Option sets<br> <br>Attributes<br> <br>Legend sets<br> <br>Legends                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| OptionSets           | Opção                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |

![](resources/images/import_export/metadata_dependency_export.png)

![](resources/images/import_export/metadata_dependency_export_object_types.png)

1.  Select an object type: _Data sets_, _Programs_, _Category combination_,
    _Dashboard_, _Data element groups_ or _OptionSets_.

2.  Select an object.

3.  Select a format: *JSON*

4.  Select a compression type: _Zip_ , _GZip_ or _Uncompressed_

5.  Click **Export metadata dependencies** which will open a new
    web-browser window that will give you a file to download to your
    local computer.

### Exportação de dados { #data_export }

Data export can be accessed from the sidebar by clicking on Data
export.

![](resources/images/import_export/data_export.png)

1.  Select which organisation units to export from.

2.  Select if you want export to include descendants of organisation
    units selected in Step 1 or only the manually selected
    organisation units.

3.  Select which data sets to export.

4.  Set the start and end date.

5.  Select a format: _JSON_, _CSV_, _XML_, or _ADX_

6.  Select a compression mode: **Zip** , **GZip** or **Uncompressed**

7.  Click **Advanced options** if you want to adjust one or more of
    the following settings before exporting:

    - Include deleted
    - Data element ID scheme
    - Organisation unit ID scheme
    - ID scheme

8.  Click **Export data** which will open a new web-browser window
    that will give you a file to download to your local computer.

### Exportação de evento { #event_export }

Event export can be accessed from the sidebar by clicking on Event
export.

![](resources/images/import_export/event_export.png)

You can export event or tracker data in JSON, CSV, or XML formats.

1.  Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

2.  Select the inclusion:

    - _Selected_: Export event data only for the selected
      organisation unit

    - _Directly below_: Export event data including the first
      level of the organisation units inside the selections as well
      as the selected organisation unit itself.

    - _All below_: Export event data for all organisation units
      inside the selections as well as the selected organisation
      unit itself.

3.  Selecione um programa e uma fase do programa (se aplicável).

4.  Set the start date and end date.

5.  Select a format: _JSON_, _CSV_, or _XML_.

6.  Select a compression mode: _Zip_, _GZip_ or _Uncompressed_.

7.  Click **Advanced options** if you want to adjust one or more of
    the following settings before exporting:

    - Include deleted
    - Data element ID scheme
    - Organisation unit ID scheme
    - ID scheme

8.  Click **Export events** which will open a new web-browser window
    that will give you a file to download to your local computer.

### Tracked Entity Instances export { #tei_export }

Tracked entity instances export can be accessed from the sidebar by
clicking on TEI export.

![](resources/images/import_export/tei_export.png)

You can export event or tracker data in JSON, CSV, or XML format.

1.  Select the organisation units that should be included.

2.  Decide whether you want to filter by program or tracked entity type.

3.  Select a format: _JSON_, _CSV_, or _XML_.

4.  Click **Advanced options** if you want to adjust one or more of
    the following settings before exporting:

    - Filter by last updated date
    - Assigned user mode
    - Include deleted
    - Include all attributes
    - Data element ID scheme
    - Event ID scheme
    - Organisation unit ID scheme
    - ID scheme

5.  Click **Export tracked entity instances** which will open a new
    web-browser window that will give you a file to download to your
    local computer.

## Job Overview { #job_overview }

The job overview page can be accessed from the sidebar by clicking on
_Job Overview_.

![](resources/images/import_export/job_overview.png)

This page allows you to see the progress of all the imports you have
started this session. You can see the list of all jobs on the left
side and details about a specific selected job on the right.

### Filtering by import job type { #filtering-by-import-job-type } 

![](resources/images/import_export/job_overview_filter.png)

By default jobs of all import types are shown in the job list, but you
can filter categories you are interested in by clicking on the job
type filters above the job list.

### Recreating a previous job { #recreating-a-previous-job } 

![](resources/images/import_export/job_overview_recreate.png)

You can recreate previously run import jobs by clicking on the
_Recreate job_ button at the bottom of the page, assuming you have
selected a job from the list. This will take you to the correct import
page and fill in all the form details exactly as the job you chose to
recreate.

## Schemes { #schemes } 

The various schemes used in many of the import and export pages are
also known as identifier schemes and are used to map metadata objects
to other metadata during import, and to render metadata as part of
exports.

Table: Available values

| Scheme       | Descrição                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| ------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| ID, UID      | Corresponde ao identificador estável DHIS2, este é o esquema de identificação padrão.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| CÓDIGO         | Correspondência ao Código DHIS2, usado principalmente para trocar dados com um sistema externo.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| NOME         | Correspondência no nome DHIS2, observe que este usa o que está disponível como _object.name_ e não o nome traduzido. Observe também que os nomes nem sempre são únicos e, nesse caso, não podem ser usados.                                                                                                                                                                |
| ATTRIBUTE:ID | Corresponde ao atributo de metadados, esse atributo precisa ser atribuído ao tipo com o qual você está correspondendo e também que a propriedade exclusiva seja definida como _true_. O principal uso disso também é para trocar dados com sistemas externos, tem algumas vantagens sobre o _CODE_ já que vários atributos podem ser adicionados, portanto, pode ser usado para sincronizar com mais de um sistema. |

### ID scheme { #id-scheme } 

The ID scheme applies to all types of objects, but can be overwritten
by more specific object types.



# Configure a sincronização de metadados { #metadata_sync } 

## Sobre sincronização de dados e metadados { #about-data-and-metadata-synchronization } 

You can synchronize data and metadata between different DHIS2 instances.
Given two instances in a central-local deployment strategy, metadata
created at the central system can be synchronized with the local system
and the data created at local system can be synchronized with the
central system. This can be useful when you've multiple stand-alone
instances of DHIS2 and global metadata needs to be created at all the
local instances.

![](resources/images/metadata_synchronization/dhis2_architecture.png)

If metadata creation and update take place at the central system and if
the metadata synchronisation task is enabled, the metadata gets
synchronized down to all the local instances which are bound to the
central instance. These local instances will in turn push data values,
Event and Tracker program data and complete data registration sets to
the central instance. Enabling or disabling versioning of metadata
synchronization at local instance, will not hinder the metadata
synchronization process. This is because the metadata synchronization
interacts with versioning end points of the central instance and not
with end points of the local instance.

Each snapshot of metadata export generated is referred to a metadata
version. A new metadata version contains only the changes between the
previous version and the current version, that is it's an export between
two timestamps. All metadata versions are maintained in the DHIS2
database and are available to all local instances that connect to it.
You can schedule each of the local instances to download new metadata
versions. It is recommended to keep the metadata versions' sizes small
and logical.

> **Warning**
>
> Each instance of DHIS2, whether central or local, can create metadata
> versions. The local instance is meant to synchronize metadata from a
> central system and not create metadata on its own.
>
> If a new metadata version is created on the local instance, this
> instance can't receive new metadata versions from the central
> instance, since the content of the metadata versions will be out of
> synchronization.
>
> If you've created metadata versions on a local instance, you must
> manually deleted these versions from the database before you can
> synchronize with the central instance.
>
> Assume the central and local DHIS2 instances have identical metadata
> snapshots until version 10. Then the local instance creates a new
> snapshot called version 11. After that, the central instance creates a
> new snapshot called version 11. When the local instance attempts to
> synchronize metadata, version 11 is not downloaded. However, the
> content of version 11 on the local instance is not identical to the
> content of version 11 on the central instance.

> **Note**
>
> You can also use the **Import-Export** app to synchronize metadata
> manually.

## Fluxo de Trabalho { #workflow } 

1.  On the central instance, configure metadata versioning. You should
    do this once the central instance contains metadata.

2.  Conecte instância (s) local (is) à instância central.

3.  Em instância (s) local (is), configure a sincronização automática.

## Configure o controle de versão de metadados na instância central { #configure-metadata-versioning-on-central-instance } 

> **Note**
>
> To synchronize metadata, the user account of the central system must
> have the following authority:
>
> **F\_METADATA\_MANAGE**
>
> Only users with this authority will then be able to create and
> download metadata. This is to ensure security of the central system
> where the metadata is created. Instead of giving the credentials of
> user having ALL authority to the field instances, you need to create a
> user having this specific authority only.

1.  On the central instance, open the **System Settings** app and click
    **Synchronization**.

2.  Go to the **Metadata versioning** section and select **Enable
    versioning for metadata
    sync**.

    ![](resources/images/metadata_synchronization/metadata_versioning.png)

3.  (Opcional) Selecione ** Não sincronizar metadados se as versões DHIS2 forem diferentes **.

4.  Selecione um tipo de versão de metadados: ** Melhor esforço ** ou ** Atômico **.

      - *Best effort* means that if the metadata import encounters
        missing references (for example missing data elements on a data
        element group import) it ignores the errors and continues the
        import.

      - *Atomic* means all or nothing - the metadata import will fail if
        any of the references do not exist.

        > **Note**
        >
        > Each metadata entity is associated with a "User" object. If
        > this "User" reference is missing while importing metadata
        > version of type ATOMIC, the import will fail at the validation
        > phase itself. This means that the user who creates metadata
        > also needs to synchronize down to local instances to
        > successfully import the metadata version of type ATOMIC.

5.  Click **Create new version**. The new version is added to the
    versioning table.

## Conecte a instância local à instância central { #connect-local-instance-to-central-instance } 

To enable metadata synchronization, you must configure the connection
between the local instance and the central instance.

1.  On the local instance, open the **System Settings** app and click
    **Synchronization**.

2.  Adicione os detalhes da instância central DHIS2 à instância local:

      - ** URL do servidor remoto **

      - ** Nome de usuário do servidor remoto **

      - ** Senha do servidor remoto **

3.  Go to the **Metadata versioning** section and select **Enable
    versioning for metadata sync**.

4.  (Opcional) Selecione ** Não sincronizar metadados se as versões DHIS2 forem diferentes **.

    The metadata schema changes between versions of DHIS2 which could
    make different metadata versions incompatible.

    When enabled, this option will not allow metadata synchronization to
    occur if the central and local instance(s) have different DHIS2
    versions. This apply to metadata synchronization done both via the
    user interface and the API.

    The only time it might be valuable to disable this option is when
    synchronizing basic entities, for example data elements, that have
    not changed across DHIS2 versions.

5.  (Optional) Configure email notifications to notify users about
    successful or unsuccessful metadata synchronization:

    1.  Abra o aplicativo ** System Settings ** e clique em ** Email **.

    2.  Enter **Host name**, **Port**, **User name**, **Password** and
        **Email sender**.

    3.  Click **Server** and enter a **System notifications email
        address**.

        This email address will receive notifications about the metadata
        synchronization status.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > When you receive email notification about a metadata
    > synchronization failure, check which metadata version that causes
    > the error and resolve it. Then you avoid future errors when the
    > system downloads new metadata versions.

## Configure a sincronização automática de metadados na instância local { #configure-automatic-metadata-synchronization-on-local-instance } 

Once you have configured automatic metadata synchronization (scheduling)
on local instance(s), the scheduler will run at that specific time and
synchronize (download and import) the metadata from the central
instance. No manual intervention is required from the users at the local
instance(s).

After the scheduler has completed the metadata synchronization, the
local instance will have the metadata exactly as created on the central
system.

> **Note**
>
> Passwords of users are not synchronized. They are nullified for
> security reasons. After metadata synchronization, the Admin user must
> reset these passwords.

1.  On the local instance, open the **Data Administration** app and
    click **Scheduling**.

2.  Na seção ** Metadata Synchronization **, selecione ** Enabled **.

3.  Select a time period: **Daily**, **Weekly**, **Monthly** or
    **Yearly**.

    ![](resources/images/metadata_synchronization/metadata_sync.png)

4.  Clique em ** Iniciar **.

## Crie uma nova versão de metadados manualmente na instância central ou local { #create-a-new-metadata-version-manually-on-central-or-local-instance } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Configurações do sistema ** e clique em ** Sincronização **.

2.  Go to the **Metadata versioning** section and select **Enable
    versioning for metadata sync**.

3.  (Opcional) Selecione ** Não sincronizar metadados se as versões DHIS2 forem diferentes **.

4.  Selecione ** Melhor esforço ** ou ** Atômico **.

5.  Click **Create new version**. The new version is added to the
    versioning table.

When the system is a *central instance*, you'll see three columns in the
versioning table:

![](resources/images/settings/metadata_versioning_table.png)


| Objecto | Descrição |
|---|---|
| Master version | The latest version in the system. |
| Version | Name of the version. The name is automatically generated by system. |
| When | The timestamp of the metadata version creation at the central instance. |
| Modelo | Type of metadata version. |

When system is a *local instance*, you'll see four columns in the
versioning
table:

![](resources/images/settings/metadata_versioning_table_failure_case.png)


| Objecto | Descrição |
|---|---|
| Master version | The latest version of the central instance.<br>      <br>    **Note**<br>     <br>    The master version information is the central instance's latest version. This is important to look at the difference between the versions of metadata that exist at central and at local. |
| Last sync attempt | If the last sync attempt is a failure, this will be displayed. |
| Version | Name of the version. The name is automatically generated by system. |
| When | The timestamp of the metadata version creation at the central instance. |
| Modelo | Type of metadata version. |
| Last sync | Timestamp of when the last sync happened for this version in this system. |

## Informações de referência: parâmetros de configuração de sincronização de metadados { #reference-information-metadata-synchronization-configuration-parameters } 

The process which performs metadata synchronization is called Metadata
Sync Task. This task performs a series of steps before syncing of
metadata:

  - Push data (aggregate data and anonymous events data) from local
    instance to central instance.

  - Gets the current metadata version of the local instance. Then uses
    this version information as a baseline to fetch the list of metadata
    versions created after the baseline.

  - If there are new versions created at central instance, it performs
    the synchronization of metadata versions one after the other. A mail
    will be sent to the configured user (if any) after each successful
    synchronization of metadata version at the local instance.

Once the Metadata Sync Task has run at the scheduled time, the task can
retry (if any of the steps fail) based on the configuration of the
following parameters defined in `dhis.conf` file:


| Parameter | Default value |
|---|---|
| `metadata.sync.retry` | 3 |
| `metadata.sync.retry.time.frequency.millisec` | 30000 |

Each retry will be made after the time (in millisecond) as specified. If
the steps still fail even after all the retries, then the scheduler
stops its execution and then a mail will be sent to the configured user
(if any). If no values are specified then the default values will be
used.

`metadata.sync.retry` = 5

`metadata.sync.retry.time.frequency.millisec` = 10000



# Móvel { #mobile } 

This chapter covers various mobile technologies including Web, J2ME, SMS
Service and SMS Command.

## DHIS2 Mobile Introdução { #mobile_intro } 

DHIS2 provides a range of options to allow data entry from mobile
devices, including a dedicated GPRS/3G J2ME client and two versions of
DHIS2 which have been optimized specifically for mobile browsers. Each
of these solutions will be described in detail in the following
sections. DHIS2 offers several Android clients, which are described in
detail in other sections of this guide.

Collection of data in the field can be technically challenging and
expensive. Mobile phone solutions have the potential to significantly
reduce the complexity of deploying a distributed data collection system.
Using a simple Java client installed on a mobile phone or a web browser
which works on the mobile phone, field workers can report directly to
the DHIS2 database through their mobile device.

While mobile phone solutions have a great potential, there are
complexities with such deployments. Phones lack processing power and
have a small display, they need to be charged, and often such
deployments make the most sense in areas with poor or intermittent
network coverage.

Each of the mobile solutions are introduced briefly below, and the
discussed in separate sections in detail:

  - DHIS2 Light: A mobile browser optimized data entry module for all
    devices

    This module allows for data entry directly with the browser of the
    mobile device. A wide range of devices and mobile browsers are
    supported including: Opera mini 3 & 4 (basic and advanced) - Opera
    mini 4, Nokia S40 mobiles ,Windows Phone 7, Window Mobile 6, Palm
    Pre, Blackberry (v5 and v6), Firefox mobile, iOS devices (iPhone)
    and Android devices. This client does not have offline-support, and
    an active GPRS/3G connection is required. It does not require a new
    application installation on the phone to support new features, but
    does require a stable data connection for use. This solution is
    described in [Mobile browser based data entry](#mobile_web_based)

  - DHIS2 Smartphone client: A mobile browser optimized data entry
    module for Smartphone devices

    This module allows for data entry directly with the browser of a
    Smartphone. Offline data entry is supported and it does not require
    any installation of a special client on the phone itself.

  - Cliente J2ME GPRS / 3G

    DHIS-mobile includes two separate J2ME clients supporting
    GPRS/EDGE/3G as a transport mechanism. One clients supports facility
    aggregate reporting and the second client supports name-based
    program tracking. These clients are split into separate applications
    to make deployment easier. Some health workers may have both
    applications installed on their phone. Both of these clients support
    offline-storage of data and work on J2ME enabled devices (feature
    phones). .?\>

    An active GPRS/3G connection is required in order to send data to
    the DHIS2 database, but data can be entered offline and transmitted
    when a connection is present. This client is intended primarily for
    low-end devices which support J2ME applications, although the
    offline-supports adds some memory requirements which limits the
    handset selection. While the solution is primarily tested on Nokia
    phones, it also works on several other J2ME capable handsets.

    The facility reporting J2ME client is described in the chapter "J2ME
    GPRS/3G Client"


## Entrada de dados baseada em navegador móvel { #mobile_web_based } 

### Introdução à entrada de dados do navegador móvel { #getting-started-with-mobile-browser-data-entry } 

This approach is for data-entry on a smart phone with a mobile browser
by navigating to the URL of the DHIS2 instance, for example: the full
URL link for demo on [dhis2.org](dhis2.org)
<http://apps.dhis2.org/dev/mobile/index.action> . And your mobile
browser will automatically detect the DHIS2 application where the server
URL is given (e.g.: <http://apps.dhis2.org/dev>). Here is the login form
to access the application with user-name and password. Click on "Login"
to continue or "Reset" to reset:

![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-login.png)

Após o login, há a lista de funções:

![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-menu.PNG)

**- Aggregate Reporting:** Entries for aggregate data with
defined/assigned dataset by organisation-units

\- **Rastreamento:**

  - Find Person: find person based on Name, Phone Number or ID, and
    Organization unit.

  - Activity Plan: Entries data for the persons by organisation-units,
    persons and programs/program-stages

  - Registro de pessoa: registre uma nova pessoa

  - Anônimo: inscrições para pessoas anônimas com base em programas

**- Messages:** Manage the messages and discussions from the server.
Message reply is available. User can send feedback message in Messages.

** - Relatórios: ** Os relatórios de saída do servidor.

\- **Settings:** User-information (e.g.: First-name, Surname, Phone
number, E-mail) and the Interface language.

** - Logout: ** para fazer logout do aplicativo.

**- Desktop version**: navigate to the desktop version of DHIS2 for
administration. This require a lot of resources from the client mobile,
for example: the sufficient memory to load the pages. Not recommended
for the normal GPRS/3G/... phones.

A lista acima será explicada em detalhes:

1.  **Aggregate Reporting:** Entries for aggregate data with
    defined/assigned dataset by
    organisation-units.

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-aggregate-reporting.PNG)

    Click on the "Aggregate Reporting", then choose an Organisation Unit
    from the list and the list of the datasets will be appeared for
    entering aggregate data. See the below example:

    **Step 1: Select an Organisation Unit from the
    list**

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-select-orgunit.png)

    **Step 2: Select a Dataset (entry form) from the
    list**

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-select-dataset.png)

    **Step 3: Select a period (based on the period type of the chosen
    dataset) from the
    list**

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-select-period.png)

    **Step 4: Entering the
    data**

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-entry.png)

    **Step 5: Save the data entered after completing the data, choose
    the option for data completeness if
    having.**

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-entry-complete-save.png)

2.  **Tracking:** **Find/Add Person, Visit Schedule, Person
    Registration,
    Anonymous**

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-tracking-menu-2.PNG)

    2.1 ***Find/Add Person***: find person based on Name, Phone Number
    or ID, and Organization unit.

      - Step 1: insert Name, Phone Number or ID and select the
        Organization Unit, then click
        Search.

        ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-tracking-find-person-1.PNG)

      - Step 2: select a
        person

        ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-tracking-findPersonStep2.png)

        Em seguida, todas as informações dessa pessoa serão exibidas

      - Step 3: choose the next program stage for entering the
        dados

        ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-tracking-findPersonStep3.png)

        To view all the program stages, click on the name of that
        program (Child Heath Program as the screen
        shot)

        ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-tracking-findPersonStep3.1.png)

    2.2: ***Visit Schedule***: Choose An Organization Unit

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-namebased-choose-org.png)

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-tracking-activityPlan.png)

      - Current Activity Plan: the list of the beneficiaries registered,
        enrolled, not yet finish/complete a/many program and there is at
        least a program-stage open for data-entry.

        \+ *Step 1: Choose a Person for
        entry*

        ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-namebased-choose-BE.png)

        \+ *Step 2: Choose a current and active program-stage for
        entering the
        data*

        ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-namebased-choose-PGS.png)

        You can also see the person's information (ID, gender, Date of
        Birth, and Blood Group) by clicking on the Details (on top of
        the list
        appeared)

        ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-namebased-choose-details.png)

        The details information of the chosen
        person:

        ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-namebased-details-info.png)

      - All Activity Plan: the list of all beneficiaries registered,
        enrolled, not yet finish/complete a/many program.

      - Single
        Event:

        ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-tracking-activityPlan-singleEvent.png)

    2.3: ** Registro de Pessoa: ** Registre uma nova Pessoa

      - Step 1: Entry personal
        information

        ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-tracking-personRegistrationStep1.png)

      - Step 2: Enrol program for the person just been registered, then
        click
        "Enroll".

        ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-tracking-personRegistrationStep2.png)

      - Step 3: Entry required information for the chosen program, then
        click
        "Enroll"

        ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-tracking-personRegistrationStep3.png)

        Here is the
        result:

        ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-tracking-personRegistrationStep4.png)

    2.4: **Anonymous:** Entries for anonymous person based on specific
    programs

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-tracking-anonymous.png)

3.  **Messages:** Manage the messages and discussions from the
    server. Message reply is
    available.

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-messages-menu.PNG)

    The number showed is the unread messages. Click on that to view the
    list of the messages (the unread messages are in bold and dark blue
    color):

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-message-conversations.PNG)

    Then you can pick up the message/topic for the discussions by
    leaving the reply message, see this
    example:

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-messages-reply.png)

    User can create and send a feedback to server in messages section.
    After sending out the new feedback, the message (feedback) will be
    listed under "Messages" for further following up.

4.  **Reports:** The output reports from the
    server

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-reports.png)

    (será atualizado)

5.  **Settings:** User-information (e.g.: First-name, Surname, Phone
    number, E-mail) and the Interface
    language.

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-settings.png)

    Here is the form for setting the user account/access and the
    interface language. Click on "SAVE" for completing the settings, see
    the example
    below:

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-settings-update.png)

6.  **Logout:** to log out the
    application

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-logout.png)

7.  **Desktop version**: navigate to the desktop version of DHIS2 for
    administration.

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-desktop-version.png)

    Here is the GUI of the desktop version (which require much memory
    for loading), not recommended for normal mobile. The example with
    DHIS2 Demo (from
    [dhis2.org](dhis2.org))

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-desktop-version-GUI.png)

<!-- end list -->

1.  ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-namebased-data-entry.png)

    After clicking on the "Namebased Data Entry", the next will guiding
    to the selections in the following steps:

    **Step 1: Choose an Organisation
    Unit**

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-namebased-choose-org.png)

    **Step 2: Choose the Activity
    Type**

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-namebased-choose-AC.png)

    (the screen-shot with an example with "Current Activity Plan"
    option)

    Normalmente haverá estes dois tipos de atividade:

    \+ "Current Activity Plan": the list of the beneficiaries
    registered, enrolled, not yet finish/complete a/many program and
    there is at least a program-stage open for data-entry.

    \+ "All Activity Plan": the list of all beneficiaries registered,
    enrolled, not yet finish/complete a/many program.

    **Step 3: Choose a Beneficiary for
    entry**

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-namebased-choose-BE.png)

    (a captura de tela com um exemplo com a opção "Hybia Welde")

    **Step 4: Choose a current and active program-stage for entering the
    data**

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-namebased-choose-PGS.png)

    (the screen-shot with an example with "16-24 months after birth"
    option)

    You can also see the beneficiary's information (ID, gender, Date of
    Birth, and Blood Group) by clicking on the Details (on top of the
    list
    appeared)

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-namebased-choose-details.png)

    The details information of the chosen
    beneficiary:

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-namebased-details-info.png)

2.  **Beneficiary Registration:** Registry a new
    beneficiary

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-beneficiary-registration.png)

    **Step 1: Choose an
    OrganisationUnit**

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-beneficiary-registration-choose-OU.png)

    **Step 2: Fill in the Beneficiary Registration
    form**

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-beneficiary-registration-form.png)

    There necessary information: Full Name, Gender, Date of Birth (and
    Blood Group).

    Clique em "SALVAR" para registrar um novo beneficiário.

    A message "Successfully Saved" will appear when the beneficiary is
    created/registered
    successfully.

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-beneficiary-registration-form-success.png)

3.  **Beneficiary Enrollment:** Enrol a beneficiary to one or many
    programs


    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-beneficiary-enrollment.png)

    Before enrolling a beneficiary to a program, the search function for
    a beneficiary is provided:

    If the beneficiary is found, the result will be listed. The simply
    click on the beneficiary name for navigating to the programs in
    which the beneficiary enrolled:

    The below screen-shot example describes the beneficiary named
    "Nguyen Van A":

    \- Has not enrolled any programs before

    \- There is one program: "Child Health Program" available for
    enrolment

    The list of the available programs for enrolment will be listed.
    Just click on the program for enrolment by specifying the date of
    enrolment and the date of incident. See the example:

    After clicking on the "ENROLL" button, if successful, the program
    enrolled will be listed under "Enrolled Programs for" + \<Name of
    the beneficiary\>, see the example:

4.  **Messages:** Manage the messages and discussions from the
    server. Message reply is
    available.

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-messages.png)

    The number showed is the unread messages. Click on that to view the
    list of the messages (the unread messages are in bold and dark blue
    color):

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-messages-unread.png)

    Then you can pick up the message/topic for the discussions by
    leaving the reply message, see this
    example:

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-messages-reply.png)

5.  **Reports:** The output reports from the
    server

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-reports.png)

    (será atualizado)

6.  **Settings:** User-information (e.g.: First-name, Surname, Phone
    number, E-mail) and the Interface
    language.

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-settings.png)

    Here is the form for setting the user account/access and the
    interface language. Click on "SAVE" for completing the settings, see
    the example
    below:

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-settings-update.png)

7.  **Feedback:** the extra function for creating a new message to
    send to the server. The new created feedback from this will be
    listed under
    "**Messages**"

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-feedback.png)

    After clicking on the "Feedback", there will be a form for
    editing/sending out a new message/discussion. See the example
    below:

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-feedback-new.png)

    After sending out the new feedback, the message (feedback) will be
    listed under "Messages" for further following
    up.

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-feedback-listed-in-messages.png)

8.  **Logout:** to log out the
    application

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-logout.png)

9.  **Desktop version**: navigate to the desktop version of DHIS2 for
    administration.

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-desktop-version.png)

    Here is the GUI of the desktop version (which require much memory
    for loading), not recommended for normal mobile. The example with
    DHIS2 Demo (from
    [dhis2.org](dhis2.org))

    ![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_web_based/mobile-browser-desktop-version-GUI.png)

## Cliente J2ME GPRS / 3G { #mobile_j2me_gprs_3g } 

The DHIS2 GPRS/3G mobile module provides a mechanism for remote clients
using mobile phones to enter data directly into the DHIS2 system. There
are two functions of the client, namely:

The solution relies on the mobile phone having a data connection
available (i.e. GPRS, Edge, 3G), over which it communicates with a DHIS2
instance which must be publicly available on the internet, as any other
web server. The client application on the phone downloads the data entry
forms to the phone from the server, and the forms can therefore be
updated without installing a new application. This is also a crucial
feature for community reporting, which relies on regularly downloading
activity plans from the server.

  - Facility reporting, for data entry and reporting of regular DHIS2
    aggregate data,

  - Activity reporting, for supporting individual activity reporting
    with the Community module.

### Disponibilidade de conexão de dados { #data-connection-availability } 

Data connection availability can be a problem in many of the contexts
where DHIS2 mobile reporting would otherwise be a good solution for
getting data directly into DHIS2. If that is the case for you, you might
want to consider trying the SMS based solution described in a separate
document. Keep in mind that even though a data connection is currently
required for communication between the server and the mobile phone, it
is only required when initializing or updating the mobile application
and when sending reports to the server. The phone stores all entered
data locally, so it can work fine with only temporary access to a data
connection on a regular basis.

### Cliente de relatório de instalação J2ME GPRS 3G { #mobile_j2me_gprs_3g_facility_reporting } 

The server side component of the web based solution is included in the
general build of DHIS2.

In order to configure the DHIS2 web-based mobile reporting, you should
follow the following steps.

  - Set the "Available for Mobile Reporting" flag for the data sets you
    want reported: Under *Maintenance-\>DataSet*-\>*Edit* mark the
    “Available for Mobile Reporting” check box and save.

  - Create a user role for the mobile user. Select
    *Maintenance-\>Users-\>User Role-\>Add new*. Add a user role name
    and description. Add the desired data sets for the role. The mobile
    user role will need to have at least privileges for DHIS2 Web API.
    Save the user role by clicking "Save".

  - Create a user which will be used by the client to login from
    *Maintenance-\>Users-\>User -\>Add new*. Fill in all of the required
    details, keeping in mind that the password must be at least 8 digits
    long, contain one capital letter,and one digit. Assign the desired
    user role to the user which was created in the previous step.

    > **Important**
    >
    > Assign the user to exactly **one** organisation unit. Each mobile
    > reporting client will need their own user name and password.

### Configuração detalhada de conjuntos de dados e formulários de relatório { #detailed-configuration-of-data-sets-and-reporting-forms } 

Though the previous steps is all that should be needed for testing the
solution more detail configuration of the datasets may be required and
are described in the following sections.

#### O mapeamento de conjuntos de dados para o layout do formulário no telefone { #the-mapping-of-data-sets-to-form-layout-on-the-phone } 

By default, a data set is mapped to a single form on the phone. If the
data set is divided into sections, each section is displayed as a
separate page on the phone. If a data element has more than one category
option combo it will be displayed as a heading with the category
combination options following.


||||
|---|---|---|
| **Form design element** | **DHIS2 Metadata** | **Metadata element** |
| Form title | Conjunto de dados | Short Name if it exists, otherwise Name |
| Page tile | Section | Section name (or form name if no sections) |
| Question | Elemento de dados | Alternative name if it exists, otherwise Name |
| Question name if combos | Combinação de opção de categoria | nome |

#### Classificação de formulários { #sorting-of-forms } 

By default, data elements will be sorted according to the global sorting
assigned in DHIS2. If sections are used, their section specific sorting
order will be used. In some cases, when sections are not used, a data
element might be used in multiple data sets, and conflict in the way it
should be sorted in individual data sets. A work around for this
situation is to wrap the whole dataset in one section (note that this
will only work if the data elements have the same category option combo)

#### Controle de versão de conjuntos de dados { #versioning-of-data-sets } 

To make it possible to compare and update the data sets on the mobile
phone with the version on the server, data sets are automatically
versioned when you edit the data set structure. Some changes which occur
on the DHIS2 server, will cause the mobile client to update its forms
with a new version.

  - Criar DataSet

  - Editar DataSet

  - Criar / editar / excluir seção no DataSet

  - Classificar ordem de seção

  - Atualizar DataElement (afeta muitos DataSets relacionados)

  - Excluir DataElement (afeta muitos DataSets relacionados)

  - Editar categoria DataElement

  - Editar combinação de categoria DataElement

#### Suporte de linguas { #language-support } 

O suporte multilíngue está disponível.

DataSet and DataElement are translated through web-based function.
Default language on server is used on mobile in cases requested language
from mobile is not available.

![](resources/images/dhis_mobile/translateDataSet.jpg)

### Configuração de aplicativo móvel { #mobile-application-setup } 

#### Instalação e inicialização { #installation-and-initialization } 

##### Instalação { #installation } 

Download the jar packages from the DHIS2 homepage:
[https://www.dhis2.org/downloads](www.dhis2.org/downloads)

##### Inicialização { #initialization } 

Initialization should be performed before the phones are delivered
end-users. Given the large variation in possible phone configurations,
it is impossible to describe the exact steps which are required in order
to enable the client on the phone. However, for most phones, simply
copying the DHIS2 Web Mobile client "JAR" file to the phone with a USB
cable or via Bluetooth is sufficient. Of course, GPRS/3G connectivity
must be enabled. Contact your mobile service provider for exact details
on the configuration of the phones and networks.

![](resources/images/dhis_mobile/mobile_login_screen.png)

Once the client has been installed on the phone, an initialization
process must occur by providing a user name, password and server URL.

1.  Efetuando login no servidor pela primeira vez.

    The first time the client logins to the server, or if the client is
    reinitialized, the username, password and server URL must be
    entered.

    If the client is unable to login, there could be several possible
    error messages which you see.

      - Connection Not Found: The specified server URL is not correct.
        Check the server address, ensure that the server is actually
        reachable, and try again.

      - Invalid User Name Or Password: the username or password is
        incorrect

      - Application not authorized to access restricted APIs : The
        server can be contacted, but the user does not have the
        necessary permissions to access the mobile reporting module

2.  Setting the PIN number: After the initial login process, a PIN
    number can be entered by the user. This will make the login process
    much easier, as the user only has to remember the four digit pin
    number, as opposed to typing in the user name and password each
    time. The PIN number can be preset if the phone is initialized prior
    to delivery, or it can be set by the users themselves if they have
    been provided with usernames and passwords.


    ![](resources/images/dhis_mobile/mobile_enter_pin.png)

    After entering the PIN, press (Menu)-\>Next.

3.  Download all forms: After the PIN has been specified, all forms will
    be downloaded from the server and stored locally on the phone..

    If the user has been configured to report on aggregate datasets, a
    list of appropriate datasets will be displayed. If the user is
    responsible for community based reporting, the list of assigned
    activities is displayed.

    *Notes*: If the Health Worker is responsible for both Facility
    Reporting and Community Reporting, DHIS2 server will send all forms
    of both Facility Reporting and Community Reporting to mobile and on
    mobile, there will be a screen to choose whether displaying Facility
    Reporting or Community Reporting.

    *Errors*:

#### Login (para uso regular) { #logging-in-for-regular-use } 

Após iniciar o aplicativo, o formulário do PIN é exibido.

  - PIN: Insira o PIN de quatro dígitos.

  - Reinitialize Command: this function will clear all data on mobile
    and we start from the login screen with username and password.

  - Errors: Invalid PIN: If the user has entered an invalid PIN, they
    will need to enter the correct PIN, or reinitialize the application
    with the correct username and password.

#### Módulo de relatórios de instalações { #facility-reporting-module } 

##### Inserindo dados { #entering-data } 

After selecting an aggregate dataset from the "Select report form"
window, the user will need to select an appropriate time period. A list
of available time periods is automatically generated.

1.  After the user has entered their PIN, they can select from a list of
    available datasets. Select the appropriate dataset and press "Next".


    ![](resources/images/dhis_mobile/select_report_form.png)

2.  Choosing periods: A list of available periods will be automatically
    displayed to the user. They can select the appropriate period from
    the list.


    ![](resources/images/dhis_mobile/aggregate_select_periods.png)

3.  Fill in values: After choosing the period, the form can be displayed
    in two modes, depending on the

      - Formulário com seções

        Each form section is displayed in a single screen with the name
        of the section in the title window.

        Para navegar de tela em tela, pressione "Avançar".

      - Formulários sem seção (conjuntos de dados sem seções)

        All fields are displayed on one screen with the title that is
        the name of DataSet

    The user simply fills in each data element with the appropriate
    value.


    ![](resources/images/dhis_mobile/aggregate_data_entry_form.png)

4.  Salvar e preencher:

    After finishing data entry, the user can choose to save the data
    locally on the phone or to upload the data directly to the DHIS2
    server.


    ![](resources/images/dhis_mobile/aggregate_save_complete.png)

    If the user saves the data form, they can edit the form at a later
    point in time if they need to. When selecting a period once again,
    the period will be marked as "Saved' as seen in the next screen
    shot.

    ![](resources/images/dhis_mobile/aggregate_data_entry_form_saved.png)

    If the user selects "Complete", and the data entry form is not
    complete, the user will be asked if they are certain they wish to
    submit the form as incomplete. Once the form has been submitted, a
    message should be displayed informing the user that the transmission
    was successful.

    ![](resources/images/dhis_mobile/aggregate_report_success.png)

##### Notas { #notes } 

1.  Lista de períodos:

    Periods marked with an asterisk (\*) is the period that is completed
    or saved, depending on the status of the data
    entry.


    ![](resources/images/dhis_mobile/aggregate_save_completed_periods.png)

    All periods that are not in period list are considered old and will
    be deleted automatically.

2.  Duração de armazenamento de valores

    The number of saved forms on mobile are limited only by the
    effective amount of storage of the mobile device.

    Forms are saved for limited period only, depending on the frequency
    of collection of the particular dataset.

      - Formulários diários: 2 meses (mês atual e anterior)

      - Formulários semanais: 4 semanas (atual e 3 semanas anteriores)

      - Formulários mensais: 2 meses (mês atual e anterior)

      - Formulários trimestrais: 2 trimestres (trimestre atual e anterior)

      - Formulários anuais: 2 anos (ano atual e anterior)

3.  Formulários preenchidos - formulários não editáveis

    If the form has been completed, the user can view the form on their
    phone, but they cannot make any subsequent edits to the form. Each
    field is greyed out and inactive for editing.

4.  Reeditar formulários preenchidos

    If the user wishes to edit data which has already been submitted to
    the server, they can do so by pressing the "Edit" button. They are
    allowed to do this assuming that the dataset has not been locked for
    the period in question. If they attempt to upload the data, the user
    will be informed that the dataset has been locked, and it is not
    possible to upload the data.


    ![](resources/images/dhis_mobile/dataset_locked_upload_failed.png)

5.  Formulários de atualização:

    This function is used to synchronize the forms on mobile and on
    server. The process is automatically triggered after entering PIN
    number.

    Note: Checking and downloading updated forms process run in
    background. After finished, prompt is displayed to ask user whether
    refresh form list or stay where they are.

6.  Suporte multilíngue:

    This function help user to choose language of mobile's GUI
    (graphical user interface) and content's language (Forms).

    The forms must be translated on server, otherwise, default language
    is used.

    Default language of first login is English. Change language in
    Setting menu will affect both interface and content.

    ![](resources/images/dhis_mobile/settingCmd.jpg)

    ![](resources/images/dhis_mobile/settingScreen.jpg)

    ![](resources/images/dhis_mobile/supportedLanguageList.jpg)

    Multi-Language Interface: In Setting menu, there are list of
    supported language (downloaded from server). Language of GUI is only
    changed after restart application.

    Multi-Language Content (forms): Form's language is change after
    click "Save". In case there are many forms, it take several minutes
    to save setting.

##### Solução de problemas { #troubleshooting } 

  - Os dados foram inseridos no telefone, mas não aparecem no servidor

    This usually occurs when users enter data on the phone, but cannot
    send it to the server. This may be because of the configuration of
    the phone, lack of credit on the phone, or lack of coverage. Usually
    an error message is displayed as shown below.


    ![](resources/images/dhis_mobile/http_error_mobile_client.png)

    Users should be informed that if they see this error, then it means
    that their data has not been transmitted.

## SMS Command  { #mobile_sms_command } <!-- @TODO: DHIS2-10850 -->

SMS command feature helps DHIS2 system receiving SMS from users,
patients, or even anonymous. A SMS command is an object containing the
configurations for each SMS form: reporting data from phones or j2me
apps, alerting users, registering patient or user, etc.

### Configure o comando SMS { #set-up-sms-command } 

This is where you can create a new SMS
command

![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_sms/mobile-sms-startup-link.png)

![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_sms/mobile-sms-startup-link-sms-command.png)

Usually each SMS command has it own property, then the setting up
process may be different from each other. Currently, we have 4 types of
SMS
command:

![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_sms/mobile-sms-conf-sms-command-types.png)

With KEY\_VALUE\_PARSER and J2ME\_PARSER, the SMS command will have
dataset because those are used for reporting data. If data is reported
for a Period which is already approved then SMS response will be sent
back containing information about approval status of the
period.

![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_sms/mobile-sms-conf-sms-command-dataset.png)

With ALERT\_PARSER and UNREGISTERED\_PARSER, the SMS command will have
user group because those are used for sending message such as SMS, DHIS2
conversation,
email.

![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_sms/mobile-sms-conf-sms-command-user-group.png)

There are certain parameters which are common to all SMS Command types.
These parameters have default values configured in the system, if user
does provide any value to these parameters then those default ones will
be used. Here is the list of those parameters



Table: Common Parameters

| Parameter | Modelo | Descrição |
|---|---|---|
| Code Value Separator | Corda | To provide custom code value separator. Default is "=" |
| Field Separator | Corda | To provide custom field separator. Default is "&#124;" |
| Reply message if no codes are sent (only the command) | Corda | To provide message if no code is found in SMS text input. Default is "Parameter missing" |
| Wrong format message | Corda | To provide message if command is not formatted correctly. Command should be formatted as per code value separator. This message will also be sent back if any mandatory parameter is missing. |
| No user message | Corda | To provide message if sending phone number is not registered in DHIS2. |
| User belong to more than one OrgUnit message | Corda | Certain SMS command types require user ( retrieved from sending phone number ) to be associated with only one organization unit. This message can be configured to be sent back in case that requirement is not fullfilled. |
| Success Message | Corda | To provide message that will be sent upon successful completion of the process. |

### Tipo de comando SMS { #sms-command-type } 

The SMS command is basically defined by its parser type. In other word,
each SMS command has one unique parser to parse the plain text SMS, then
the result will be used for the purpose of that SMS command.

#### Comando SMS para Relatório de Dados { #sms-command-for-reporting-data } 

In order to report data for example data set (aggregation), we use SMS
commands which have KEY\_VALUE\_PARSER (for phone's plain text), or
J2ME\_PARSER (for j2me
apps)

![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_sms/mobile-sms-cofig-sms-command-format-reportingdata.png)

If the command has name "report", and a list of data element with code
like above. The format should be: \[command's name\] \[code\]\[value\]
\[code\]\[value\] \[code\]\[value\]....,the \[value\] of course might be
changed depends on real data, so you have to prepare an SMS text like
this example: **report vo2 vn5 a2 b6 z3 x1**

In case the command has a separator for instance ".", the SMS text
should be:

** relatório vo.2.vn.5.a.2.b.6.z.3.x.1 **

ou ** relatório vo.2 | vn.5 | a.2 | b.6 | z.3 | x.1 **

Moreover in SMS text input, orgUnit can be specified like this **org
orgUnitCode** If no orgUnit is specified in SMS then user is retrieved
first from the sending phoneNumber and then orgUnit from that user. As
far as PeriodType is concerned it should be specified in this format
"ddMM" for example 3108, but in case its not specified then PeriodType
will be retrieved from DataSet attached to SMSCommand

With the J2ME\_PARSER, you don't need to prepare those SMS text, because
the J2ME will do this job

![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_sms/mobile_sms_custom_message.PNG)

User can set the custom response message for "Wrong format message", "No
User Message", "User belong to more than one OrgUnit message" and
"Success message". If no custom message is being set, system will use
the default message.

#### Comando SMS para inscrição de entidade { #sms-command-for-entity-enrollment } 

TRACKED\_ENTITY\_REGISTRATION\_PARSER can be used to enrol tracked
entity into the system.

![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_sms/TEI_parser.png)

Command name will be followed by tracked entity attributes pertaining to
specific program which this command is associated with. Program
selection will be done while creating this command.

Default text pattern ( if field separator and codevalue separator is not
provided ) for this parser would look like this. **childProgram
fn=xmen|ln=xmen2|age=4**

In case field separator is for example "," then text would look like
this.**childProgram fn=xmen,ln=xmen2,age=4**

Rest of the behavior is same as for other commands. If user does not
provide those parameters then default ones will be used.

#### Comando SMS para entrada de dados do estágio do programa { #sms-command-for-program-stage-data-entry } 

PROGRAM\_STAGE\_DATAENTRY\_PARSER can be used to enter program stage
related data for a specific tracked entity instance.

![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_sms/programstage_data_parser.png)

Command name will be followed by data elements pertaining to specific
program stage which this command is associated with. Program and program
stage selection will be done while creating this command.

Default text pattern ( if field separator and codevalue separator is not
provided ) for this parser would look like this. **programstage
bcgd=1|opvd=2|wght=34**

In case field separator is for example "," then text would look like
this.**programstage bcgd=1,opvd=2,wght=34**

Rest of the behavior is same as for other commands. If user does not
provide those parameters then default ones will be used.

#### Comando SMS para Alerta, Registro { #sms-command-for-alerting-registering } 

In order to alert users, we use SMS commands which have ALERT\_PARSER
(for phone's plain text), or UNREGISTERED\_PARSER (for j2me apps).
UNREGISTERED\_PARSER can also be used for registering IDSR
rumour.

![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_sms/mobile-sms-cofig-sms-command-format-alert.png)

The format of those command will be: \[command's name\] \[text\], for
example:

** alertar um caso de emergência em uma cidade **

Commands which has ALERT\_PARSER will be received from users only

#### Comando SMS para Registro de Eventos { #sms-command-for-event-registration } 

Event Registration can be used to register anonymous event into the
system based on the data collected through SMS. This command type is
associated with Programs of type WITHOUT\_REGISTRATION. For example
Birth events can be tracked using this parser.

![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_sms/event-registration-parser.png)

The format of those command will be: \[command's name\]
\[code\]\[separator\]\[value\], for example:

** nascimento A = 1, B = 2, G = Masculino **

Code/Value separator is configurable. Pipe "|" is by default taken as
field separator. Commands which has EVENT\_REGISTRATION\_PARSER will be
received from DHIS2 users only. Once command is successfully received
then data received in SMS will be parsed and event will be registered in
DHIS2.

## Serviço SMS { #mobile_sms_service } 

SMS Service is a generic service used for sending/receiving SMS. Any
other DHIS2 module can include this service and utilize it to send and
receive SMS from users or workers in the field.

### Configurando o serviço de SMS { #setting-up-sms-service } 

There are few pre-requisites in order to make this service functional.
There are two ways to complete these steps. One way is to configure
gateway from the GUI in Mobile Configuration Module. The other way is to
use SMS Web Api.

  - Configurar gateway de SMS

#### Configurar gateway de SMS { #configure-sms-gateway } 

There are five different types of Gateways supported by SMS Service. SMS
can be sent if any one of the gateway is configured. If more than one
gateways are present, then they will be used in round-robin fashion for
load balancing. There are different parameters for different type of
gateway. The Gateway can be configured in GUI in Mobile Configuration
Module as shown in the figure. More information about parameters needed
to configure gateway can be found in [Gateway
Configurations] section of new SMS app.(#gateway.configuration)


![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_sms/sms-app.png)

#### Configurar GenericHttp Gateway { #configure-generichttp-gateway } 

Many DHIS2 instances are using GenericHttpGateway to connect to their
local gateways. These local gateways provides HTTP APIs for sending SMS.
In new GenericHttpGateway it is now possible to configure generic configuration
template for gateway configuration. This template is converted into request payload by replacing
place holders with actual values taken from gateway key value parameters.


![](resources/images/dhis2_mobile_sms/generic-gateway.png)

### Configurações de gateway { #gateway.configuration } 

A tabela abaixo mostra os parâmetros necessários para configurar o gateway.



Table: Gateway Configuration Parameters

| Parameter | BulkSMS Gateway | Clickatell Gateway | Generic HTTP Gateway | Gateway SMPP | Descrição |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Gateway Name | Opcional | Opcional | Opcional | Opcional | Used as gateway identity. Default name will be stored in case this parameter is not configured. Its use is recommended |
| User Name | Requerido | Optional (if token is used) | Requerido | Requerido | Used for API authentication |
| Senha | Requerido | Optional (if token is used) | Requerido | Requerido | Used for API authentication |
| Auth-Token | N/D | Optional (if password is used) | N/D | N/D | Used for API authentication |
| URL Template | N/D | N/D | Requerido | Requerido | Url Tempalte is only required in case of GenericHttpGateway . For example "http://smsgatewa1.com" |
| Headers | N/D | N/D | Opcional | N/D | Header option can be checked to send selected parameter as http header. For example username/password/token can be sent in http header. |
| useGet | N/D | N/D | Opcional | N/D | HTTP POST method is used by default for posting data toward gateway. But in certain cases if HTTP GET method is required for doing so then useGet parameter can be set to true. Default value for useGet is false. |
| systemType | N/D | N/D | N/D | Requerido | SystemType parameter is required for SMPP gateway. Default value is 'cp' |
| typeOfNumber | N/D | N/D | N/D | Requerido | TypeOfNumber parameter is required for SMPP gateway. Default value is 'UNKNOWN'. Other possible values are UNKNOWN, INTERNATIONAL, NATIONAL, NETWORK_SPECIFIC, SUBSCRIBER_NUMBER, ALPHANUMERIC and ABBREVIATED |
| numberPlanIndicator | N/D | N/D | N/D | Requerido | NumberPlanIndicator parameter is required for SMPP gateway. Default value is UNKNOWN. Other possible values are UNKNOWN, ISDN, DATA, TELEX, LAND_MOBILE, NATIONAL, PRIVATE, ERMES, INTERNET and WAP |
| bindType | N/D | N/D | N/D | Requerido | BindType parameter is required for SMPP gateway. Default value is TX. Other possible values are BIND_TX, BIND_RX and BIND_TRX |
| compressed | N/D | N/D | N/D | Opcional | Compressed parameter is optional for SMPP gateway. Default value is false |
| sendUrlParameters | N/D | N/D | Opcional | N/D | Gateway parameters will be appended with url for example `https://samplegateway.com/messages?apiKey={apiKey}&to={recipients},content={text},deliveryreport={dp}` |
| contentType | N/D | N/D | Opcional | N/D | The type in which data will be sent to sms gateway. Default is application/x-www-form-urlencoded. Other supported types are application/json, application/xml and text/plain |
| configurationTemplate | N/D | N/D | Opcional | N/D | Generic configuration template can be used to provide the data in the form acceptable to external gateway. For example `username=${username}&password=${password}&to=${recipients}&countrycode=880&message=${text$}&messageid=0`. Json/xml template can also be provided. |



# Configuring SMS { #sms-configuration-intro }

This document covers the functionality of the SMS Configuration App. For
additional information about SMS service integration, please refer to the
[Mobile](#mobile_intro) document.

## Comandos SMS { #sms-configuration-commands }

SMS commands process SMS messages received by a DHIS2 instance, taking certain
actions depending on the command and message content. Multiple SMS commands can
be set up to process and handle data in multiple ways. A SMS command is an
object containing the configurations for each SMS form: reporting data from
phones or j2me apps, alerting users, registering patients or users, etc.

### Listing available commands { #sms-configuration-commands-list }

To see all available commands, navigate to the "Commands" page.  All commands
will be listed in a table. On this page the following actions are available:

* Add commands (1)
* Edit commands (2)
* Delete commands (3)
* Batch-delete commands (4)

![SMS Commands - List](resources/images/sms-configuration/commands-list.png)

### Delete available commands { #sms-configuration-commands-delete }

Deleting commands can be done by individually checking the checkboxes of each
command (1) that should be deleted or by selecting all displayed commands by
checking the checkbox in the table head (2). After selecting the commands to
delete, the "Delete selected" button needs to be clicked (3).

![SMS Commands - Delete selection](resources/images/sms-configuration/commands-delete-selection.png)

To prevent accidental deletions, a confirmation dialog will show up.

![SMS Commands - Delete confirmation](resources/images/sms-configuration/commands-delete-confirmation.png)

### Adding commands { #sms-configuration-commands-add }

> **Caution**
>
> Commands are not active immediately after they are added! 
> They must then be edited in order to configure the necessary fields!

After clicking on the "Add command" button in the command overview page, a
dynamic form will appear. Depending on the parser type, different inputs will
be displayed:

| Parser type | User group | Programa | Estágio do Programa | Conjunto de dados |
|-|-|-|-|-|
| Alert parter | &#10003; | &#10005; | &#10005; | &#10005; |
| Event registration parser | &#10005; | &#10003; | &#10003; | &#10005; |
| J2ME parser | &#10005; | &#10005; | &#10005; | &#10003; |
| Key value parser | &#10005; | &#10005; | &#10005; | &#10003; |
| Program stage data entry parser | &#10005; | &#10003; | &#10003; | &#10005; |
| Tracked entity registration parser | &#10005; | &#10003; | &#10005; | &#10005; |
| Unregistered parser | &#10003; | &#10005; | &#10005; | &#10005; |

#### Event registration parser { #sms-configuration-commands-add-eventregistration }

These commands can have short codes for their associated program stage.
Only programs of type "Event program" can be chosen for this command.
Therefore only one program stage exists, which will be selected automatically.

#### Program stage data entry parser { #sms-configuration-commands-add-programstagedataentry }

These commands can have short codes for their associated program stage.
Only programs of type "Tracker program" can be chosen for this command.
Unlike "Event registration" parsers, a program stage has to be chosen for this
parser type.

### Editing commands { #sms-configuration-commands-edit }

When editing commands, changing the parser type as well as the additional data
supplied when adding the command is not possible. The only way this is
currently possible is by creating a new command and deleting the old one.

There are certain parameters which are common to all SMS Command types.
These parameters have default values configured in the system, if user
does provide any value to these parameters then those default ones will
be used. Here is the list of those parameters

These common fields are:

| Parameter | Modelo | Descrição |
|---|---|---|
| Field Separator | Corda | To provide custom field separator. Default is "&#124;" |
| Reply message if no codes are sent (only the command) | Corda | To provide message if no code is found in SMS text input. Default is "Parameter missing" |
| Wrong format message | Corda | To provide message if command is not formatted correctly. Command should be formatted as per code value separator. This message will also be sent back if any mandatory parameter is missing. |
| No user message | Corda | To provide message if sending phone number is not registered in DHIS2. |
| User belong to more than one OrgUnit message | Corda | Certain SMS command types require user ( retrieved from sending phone number ) to be associated with only one organization unit. This message can be configured to be sent back in case that requirement is not fullfilled. |
| Success Message | Corda | To provide message that will be sent upon successful completion of the process. |

Some commands have the option to add short codes, which are explained in the
individual sections for each parser type down below.

#### Editing alert parser commands { #sms-configuration-commands-edit-alertparser }

When editing an alert parser command, only two fields are editable, the fields
that are shared between most parser types are not present:

* Name (required)
* Confirm message

Both are text fields.

#### Editing event registration parser commands { #sms-configuration-commands-edit-eventregistration }

Commands of this parser type have all the shared fields.
Additionally short codes can be defined.
A short code can be added for every data element connected to the program stage
that was selected when adding the command:

![SMS Commands - Event registration parser short codes](resources/images/sms-configuration/commands-edit-eventregistrationparse-shortcodes.png)

#### Editing J2ME parser commands { #sms-configuration-commands-edit-j2me }

Commands of this parser type have all the shared fields. The SMS command will
have a dataset because those are used for reporting data. If data is reported
for a Period which is already approved then SMS response will be sent back
containing information about approval status of the period. Additionally short
codes can be defined. Each command is connected to a dataset. The dataset has
data elements, which have category combos, which have at least one category
option combo. For every existing "data element - category option combo"
combination, a short code can be provided.

Required values notice Make sure at least one SMS short code is provided when
completeness method "Receive at least one data value" is chosen, otherwise
received messages will not be processed.

##### Short code formulas { #sms-configuration-commands-edit-j2me-shortcodeformulas }

Each short code can have an optional formula. By providing a formula, the value
of a different data element can be either added or subtracted.

This can be done by clicking the "Add formula" / "Edit formula" button below
the short code's input field:

![SMS Commands - J2Me parser short codes - Add/Edit formula button](resources/images/sms-configuration/commands-edit-j2meparser-shortcodes-formulabutton.png)

When clicking the button, a modal will appear which offers a dropdown to select
a data element, and the formula operator, which can be either "+" or "-":

![SMS Commands - J2Me parser short codes - Add/Edit formula modal](resources/images/sms-configuration/commands-edit-j2meparser-shortcodes-formulamodal.png)

By clicking "Save", the formula will be added to the main edit form, it does
not get saved to the command automatically! In order to save a changed formula,
you need to submit the whole form.

###### Removing a short code formula { #sms-configuration-commands-edit-j2me-removingshortcodeformula }

If a short code has a formula, it can be removed by clicking the "Edit formula"
button. The modal that will appear, has a button "Remove". By clicking that
button, the formula will be removed from the short code in the main form and
the modal will close. It does not get saved to the command automatically! In
order to save the removal of the formula, you need to submit the whole form.

![SMS Commands - J2Me parser short codes - Add/Edit formula modal](resources/images/sms-configuration/commands-edit-j2meparser-shortcodes-formulamodalremove.png)

#### Editing key value parser commands { #sms-configuration-commands-edit-keyvalue }

This command type works identically to J2ME parser commands work. Please check
the documentation above.

#### Editing program stage data entry parser commands { #sms-configuration-commands-edit-programstagedataentry }

Commands of this parser type have all the shared fields.  Additionally short
codes can be defined. A short code can be added for every data element
connected to the program stage that was selected when adding the command:

![SMS Commands - Program stage data entry parser short codes](resources/images/sms-configuration/commands-edit-programstagedataentryparser-shortcodes.png)

#### Editing tracked entity registration parser commands { #sms-configuration-commands-edit-trackedentityregistration }

Commands of this parser type have all the shared fields.  Additionally short
codes can be defined. A short code can be added for every tracked entity
attribute connected to the program that was selected when adding the command:

![SMS Commands - Program stage data entry parser short codes](resources/images/sms-configuration/commands-edit-trackedentityregistrationparser-shortcodes.png)

#### Editing unregistered parser commands { #sms-configuration-commands-edit-unregistered }

This command type works identically to alert parser commands work. Please check
the documentation above.

## SMS Gateways { #sms-configuration-gateways }

An SMS gateway lets a DHIS2 instance send and receive SMS messages. Different
gateway types can be added and configured below. At least one gateway is needed
to send and receive SMS messages. Load balancing will use all gateways if there
are multiple available.

There are four types of Gateways supported by the SMS Service:
* Generic gateways
* BulkSMS gateways
* Clickatell gateways
* SMPP gateways

### Listing gateways { #sms-configuration-gateways-listing }

To see all available gateways, navigate to the "Gateway configurations" page.
All gateways will be listed in a table. On this page the following actions are
available:

* Add gateways (1)
* Edit gateways (2)
* Delete gateways (3)
* Batch-delete gateways (4)
* Set the default gateway (5)

![SMS Gateways - List](resources/images/sms-configuration/gateways-list.png)

### Adding gateways { #sms-configuration-gateways-add }

After clicking on the "Add gateway" button in the gateway configurations
overview page, a dynamic form will appear. It's devided into two sections:

1. The gateway type (1)
1. The gateway's configuration, depends on the gateway type (2)

![SMS Gateways - Adding gateways](resources/images/sms-configuration/gateways-addinggateways.png)

For more details about configuring gateways, please refer to the [Gateway
Configurations](#gateway.configuration) section of the "Mobile" maintenance
documentation.

### Editing gateways { #sms-configuration-gateways-edit }

Editing is similar to adding gateways with the exception that the gateway type
cannot be altered. If a gateway has the wrong type, it needs to be deleted and
added again. For more information how to edit gateways, please refer to the
"Adding gateways" section above.

## View inbound SMS { #sms-configuration-inbound }

To see all inbound sms, navigate to the "Received" page.  All received sms will
be listed in a paginated table. On this page the following actions are
available:

* Filtering the inbound SMSes (1)
* Deleting SMSes (2)
* Batch-deleting SMSes (3)

![SMS Inbound SMSes - Listing inbound SMSes](resources/images/sms-configuration/inboundsms-list.png)

### Filtrando { #sms-configuration-inbound-filtering }

#### Resetting filters { #sms-configuration-inbound-filtering-resetting }

All set filters can be reset by clicking on the "Reset filter" button.

![SMS Inbound SMSes - Filter inbound SMSes by status](resources/images/sms-configuration/inboundsms-resetfilters.png)

#### Filtering by status { #sms-configuration-inbound-filtering-status }

The list of inbound SMSes can be filtered by the following statuses:

* Todos
* Fracassado
* Incoming
* Processed
* Processing
* Sent
* Unhandled

![SMS Inbound SMSes - Filter inbound SMSes by status](resources/images/sms-configuration/inboundsms-filterbystatus.png)

#### Filtering by phone number { #sms-configuration-inbound-filtering-phonenumber }

By entering a phone number in the input field above the table with the SMSes,
the table can be filtered by that phone number.

![SMS Inbound SMSes - Filter inbound SMSes by status](resources/images/sms-configuration/inboundsms-filterbyphonenumber.png)

## View outbound SMS { #sms-configuration-outbound }

This section is identical to the "Inbound"/"Received" SMSes section, with only
one difference: The list cannot be filtered by a phone number. Please refer to
the ["View inbound SMS"](#sms-configuration-inbound) section.



> **Caution**
>
> The screenshots and information in this section is stale and in
> process of being updated.

## Instalando aplicativos no DHIS2 { #apps_installing_apps }

Apps can be installed by uploading zip file into the App Manager. In,
Services → Apps, click on the _App Hub_ menu item.
![](resources/images/apps/app-management.png) The app can be uploaded by
pressing the Browse button and after selecting the zip package, the file
is uploaded automatically and installed in DHIS2. You can also browse
through apps in the DHIS2 [AppHub](https://apps.dhis2.org/)
and download apps from there. The DHIS2 AppHub allows for app
searching, reviewing, commenting, requesting features, rating on the
apps by the community.

## Aplicativos de lançamento { #apps_launching_apps }

After installation, your apps will be integrated with the menu system
and can be accessed under services and from the module overview page. It
can also be accessed from the home page of the apps module. Click on an
app in the list in order to launch it.



# Sobre dimensões de dados { #data_dimensions } 

## Dimensões de dados: blocos de construção principais em DHIS2 { #data-dimensions-core-building-blocks-in-dhis2 } 

A data value in DHIS2 is described by at least three dimensions: 1) data
element, 2) organisation unit, and 3) period. These dimensions form the
core building blocks of the data model.

![](resources/images/data_dimensions/datavalue_with_dimensions.png)

As an example, if you want to know how many children that were immunised
for measles in Gerehun CHC in December 2014, the three dimensions which
describe that value are the data element "Measles doses given", the
organisation unit "Gerehun CHC", and the period "December 2014". All
data values have at least these three dimensions describing *what*,
*where*, and *when*.

In addition to the data element, organisation unit, and period
dimensions, data values may also be associated with additional data
dimensions. A common use of this feature is to describe data values
which are reported by multiple partners in the same location for the
same data element and time period. In principle, it can be used as a
"free-form" dimension, to describe multiple observations of the same
phenomena at the same place and time. For more information about this,
see Chapter 34: Additional data dimensions.


| Organisation Unit | Elemento de Dados | Período | Valor |
|---|---|---|---|
| Gerehun CHC | Measles doses given | Dec-09 | 22 |
| Tugbebu CHP | Measles doses given | Dec-09 | 18 |

## Data elements: the *what* dimension { #data-elements-the-what-dimension } 

### Categorias de elementos de dados { #data-element-categories } 

The data element mentioned above ,"Measles doses given", can be further
disaggregated into by combinations of data element categories. Each
system administrator of DHIS2 is free to define any data element
category dimensions for data elements. There are however, certain best
practices which should generally be followed.

Given the example of Measles vaccination, if you want to know whether
these vaccines were given at the facility (fixed) or out in the
community as part of the outreach services then you could add a
dimension called—e.g., "Place of service", with the two possible options
"Fixed" and "Outreach". Then all data collected on measles immunisation
would have to be disaggregated along these to options. In addition to
this you might be interested in knowing how many of these children who
were under 1 year or above 1 year of age. If so you can add an Age
dimension to the data element with the two possible options "\<1 y" and
"\>1 y". This implies further detail on the data collection process. You
can also apply both categories "Place of service" and "Age" and combine
these into a data element category combination e.g. called "EPI
disaggregation". You would then be able to look at four different more
detailed values in stead of only one as in the example above for the
data element "Measles doses given": 1) "Fixed and \<1 y, 2) Fixed and
\>1 y, 3) Outreach and \<1 y, and 4) Outreach and \>1 y. This adds
complexity to how data is collected by the health facilities, but at the
same time opens up for new possibilities of detailed data analysis of
Measles immunisation.



Table: Example of detailed storage of data values when using data element categories "Place of Service" and "Age" (simplified for readability compared to the actual database table)

| Organisation Unit | Elemento de Dados | Place of service | Idade | Período | Valor |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Gerehun CHC | Measles doses given | Fixed | \<1 y | Dec-09 | 12 |
| Gerehun CHC | Measles doses given | Outreach | \<1 y | Dec-09 | 4 |
| Gerehun CHC | Measles doses given | Fixed | \>1 y | Dec-09 | 4 |
| Gerehun CHC | Measles doses given | Outreach | \>1 y | Dec-09 | 2 |
| Tugbebu CHP | Measles doses given | Fixed | \<1 y | Dec-09 | 10 |
| Tugbebu CHP | Measles doses given | Outreach | \<1 y | Dec-09 | 4 |
| Tugbebu CHP | Measles doses given | Fixed | \>1 y | Dec-09 | 3 |
| Tugbebu CHP | Measles doses given | Outreach | \>1 y | Dec-09 | 1 |

### Conjuntos de grupos de elementos de dados { #data-element-group-sets } 

While the data element categories and their options described above
provide the level of detail (disaggregation) at the point of data
collection and how data values get stored in the database, the data
element group sets and groups can be used to add more information to
data elements after data collection. As an example, if you are analysing
many data elements at the same time in a report, you would want to group
these based on some criteria. Instead of looking at all the data
captured in a form for immunisation and nutrition, you might want to
separate or group data elements along a programme dimension (known as a
data element group set in DHIS2) where "Immunisation" (or EPI) and
"Nutrition" would be the two groups.

Expanding the report to include data from other programs or larger
themes of health data would mean more groups to such a group set
dimension, like "Malaria", "Reproductive Health", "Stocks". For this
example, you would create a data element group set called "Programme"
(or whatever name you find appropriate), and to represent the different
programmes in this dimension you would define data elements groups
called "EPI", "Nutrition", "Malaria", "Reproductive health" and so on,
and add all these groups to the "Programme" group set. To link or tag
the data element "Measles doses given" to such a dimension you must (in
our example) add it to the "EPI" group. Which groups you add "Measles
doses given" to does not affect how health facilities collect the data,
but adds more possibilities to your data analysis. So for the group set
dimensions there are three levels; the group set (e.g. "Programme"), the
group (e.g. "EPI"), and the data element (e.g. "Measles doses given").

Indicators can be grouped into indicator groups and further into
indicator group sets (dimensions) in exactly the same way as data
elements.


| Organisation Unit | Elemento de Dados | Programme | Período | Valor |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| Gerehun CHC | Measles doses given | EPI | Dec-09 | 22 |
| Gerehun CHC | Vitamin A given | Nutrition | Dec-09 | 16 |
| Tugbebu CHP | Measles doses given | EPI | Dec-09 | 18 |
| Tugbebu CHP | Vitamin A given | Nutrition | Dec-09 | 12 |
| Gerehun CHC | Malaria new cases | Malária | Dec-09 | 32 |
| Tugbebu CHP | Malaria new cases | Malária | Dec-09 | 23 |

## Organisation units: the *where* dimension { #organisation-units-the-where-dimension } 

Organisation units in DHIS2 should typically represent a location, such
as a Community Health Centre or referral hospitals, or an administrative
unit like "MoHS Sierra Leone", "Bo District" or "Baoma Chiefdom". In
non-health sector applications, they could be "schools" or "water
points". Orgunits are represented in a default hierarchy, usually the
default administrative hierarchy of a country or region, and are
therefore assigned an organisational level. As an example, Sierra Leone
has four organisation unit levels; National, District, Chiefdom, and
Facility, and all orgunits are linked to one of these levels. An orgunit
hierarchy in DHIS2 can have any number of levels. Normally data is
collected at the lowest level, at the health facility, but can be
collected at any level within the hierarchy, such as both the districts
as well as the facility level.

When designing reports at higher levels with data aggregated at the
district or province level, DHIS2 will use the hierarchy structure to
aggregate all the health facilities' data for any given unit at any
level. The organisation unit level capturing the data always represents
the lowest level of detail that is possible to use in data analysis, and
the organisational levels define the available levels of aggregation
along a geographical dimension.

### Conjuntos de grupos de unidades de organização e grupos { #organisation-unit-group-sets-and-groups } 

While facility level is typically the lowest geographical level for
disaggregation in DHIS2, there are ways to flexibly group organisation
units into any number of dimensions by using the organisation unit
groups and group set functionality. As an example, if all facilities are
given an official type like "Community health center" or "District
Hospital, it is possible to create an organisation unit group set called
"Type" and add groups with the names of the types mentioned above. In
order for the group sets to function properly in analysis, each
organisation unit should be a member of a single group (compulsory and
exclusive) within a group set. Stated somewhat differently, a facility
should not be both a "Community health center" as well as a "District
hospital".

#### Herdar os valores de um conjunto de grupos de unidades organizacionais { #inherit-the-values-of-an-organisation-unit-group-set } 

You can improve the completeness of your aggregated data by inheriting
the settings of a "parent" organisation unit in your organisation unit
hierarchy. This is particularly helpful if you are aggregating the data
of more than 100 organisation units. See the
[Maintenance](https://docs.dhis2.org/master/en/user/html/manage_organisation_unit.html#create_organisation_unit_group_set)
app documentation for more
details.

#### Hierarquias de unidade organizacional alternativa - uso avançado de conjuntos de grupos e grupos { #alternative-organisation-unit-hierarchies-advanced-use-of-group-sets-and-groups } 

A more advanced use of organisation unit group sets is to create
alternative hierarchies e.g. use administrative borders from other
ministries. In Sierra Leone that could mean an alternative hierarchy of
1:MoHS, 2:Districts, and 3: Local councils, instead of the four-level
hierarchy with chiefdoms and facilities. For instance, if all facilities are linked
to a specific local council, it would be possible to look at data
aggregated by local council instead of chiefdom. Then you would first
need to create a group set called "Local council" and then create one
organisation unit group for every local council, and finally link all
facilities to their corresponding local council group.


| Distrito | OrgUnit Type | Elemento de Dados | Período | Valor |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| Bo | CHC | Measles doses given | Dec-09 | 121 |
| Bo | CHP | Measles doses given | Dec-09 | 98 |
| Bo | MCHP | Measles doses given | Dec-09 | 87 |
| Bombali | CHC | Measles doses given | Dec-09 | 110 |
| Bombali | CHP | Measles doses given | Dec-09 | 67 |
| Bombali | MCHP | Measles doses given | Dec-09 | 59 |

### Melhores práticas no uso de conjuntos de grupos e grupos { #best-practice-on-the-use-of-group-sets-and-groups } 

As mentioned above, all organisation units should be a member of a
single group within a group set. If an organisation unit is not present
in any group or is present in multiple group members in a group set,
this can lead to unexpected results in the analysis modules. DHIS2 has
integrity checks to identify organisation units which are not present in
any organisation unit group set member, or which is present in multiple
groups.

## Period: the *when* dimension { #period_types } 

The period dimension becomes an important factor when analysing data
over time e.g. when looking at cumulative data, when creating quarterly
or annual aggregated reports, or when doing analysis that combines data
with different characteristics like monthly routine data, annual
census/population data or six-monthly staff data.

### Tipos de período { #period-types } 

In DHIS2, periods are organised according to a set of fixed period types
described below. The following list is for the default ISO 8601 calendar
type.

1.  Diariamente

2.  Weekly: The system supports various weekly period types, with
    Monday, Wednesday, Thursday, Saturday and Sunday as the first day of
    the week. You collect data through data sets configured to use the
    desired weekly period type. The analytics engine will attribute
    weekly data to the month which contains four days or more of the
    week.

3.  Bi-weekly: Two week periods beginning with the first week of the
    year.

4.  Mensal: refere-se aos meses do calendário padrão.

5.  Bimestral: períodos de dois meses com início em janeiro.

6.  Trimestralmente: trimestres padrão ISO, começando em janeiro.

7.  Seis meses: períodos de seis meses começando em janeiro

8.  Anual: refere-se a um ano civil.

9.  Financial April: Financial year period beginning on April 1st and
    ending on March 31st of the calendar next year

10. Financial July: Financial year period beginning on July 1st and
    ending on June 31st of the calendar next year

11. Financial Oct: Financial year period beginning on October 1st and
    ending on September 31st of the calendar next year

12. Six-monthly April: Six-month periods beginning on April 1st with a
    duration of six calendar months.

As a general rule, all organisation units should collect the same data
using the same frequency or periodicity. A data entry form therefore is
associated with a single period type to make sure data is always
collected according to the correct and same periodicity across the
country.

It is possible however to collect the same data elements using different
period types by assigning the same data elements to multiple data sets
with different period types, however then it becomes crucial to make
sure no organisation unit is collecting data using both data sets/period
types as that would create overlap and duplication of data values. If
configured correctly the aggregation service in DHIS2 will aggregate the
data together, e.g. the monthly data from one part of the country with
quarterly data from another part of the country into a national
quarterly report. For simplicity and to avoid data duplication it is
advised to use the same period type for all organisation units for the
same data elements when possible.

### Períodos relativos { #relative-periods } 

In addition to the fixed period types described in the previous section,
DHIS2 also support relative periods for use in the analysis modules.

When creating analytical resources within DHIS2 it is possible to make
use of the relative periods functionality. The simplest scenario is when
you want to design a monthly report that can be reused every month
without having to make changes to the report template to accommodate for
the changes in period. The relative period called "Last month" allows
for this, and the user can at the time of report generation through a
report parameter select the month to use in the report.

A slightly more advanced use case is when you want to make a monthly
summary report for immunisation and want to look at the data from the
current (reporting) month together with a cumulative value for the year
so far. The relative period called "This year" provides such a
cumulative value relative to the reporting month selecting when running
the report. Other relative periods are the last 3,6, or 12 months
periods which are cumulative values calculated back from the selected
reporting month. If you want to create a report with data aggregated by
quarters (the ones that have passed so far in the year) you can select
"Last four quarters". Other relative periods are described under the
reporting table section of the manual.


| Organisation Unit | Elemento de Dados | Reporting month | So far this year | Reporting month name |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| Gerehun CHC | Measles doses given | 15 | 167 | Oct-09 |
| Tugbebu CHP | Measles doses given | 17 | 155 | Oct-09 |

### Agregação de períodos { #aggregation-of-periods } 

While data needs to be collected on a given frequency to standardise
data collection and management, this does not put limitations on the
period types that can be used in data analysis and reports. Just like
data gets aggregated up the organisational hierarchy, data is also
aggregated according to a period hierarchy, so you can create quarterly
and annual reports based on data that is being collected on a Monthly
basis. The defined period type for a data entry form (data set) defines
the lowest level of period detail possible in a report.

#### Soma e agregação média ao longo da dimensão do período { #sum-and-average-aggregation-along-the-period-dimension } 

When aggregating data on the period dimension there are two options for
how the calculation is done, namely sum or average. This option is
specified on a per data element in DHIS2 through the use of the
'aggregation operator' attribute in the Add/Edit Data Elements dialog.

Most of the data collected on a routinely basis should be aggregated by
summing up the months or weeks, for instance to create a quarterly
report on Measles immunisation one would sum up the three monthly values
for "Measles doses given".

Other types of data that are more permanently valid over time like
"Number of staff in the facility" or an annual population estimate of
"Population under 1 year" need to be aggregated differently. These
values are static for all months as long as there are valid data. For
example, the "Estimated population under 1", calculated from the census
data ,is the same for all months of a given year, or the number of
nurses working in a given facility is the same for every month in the 6
months period the number is reported for.

This difference becomes important when calculating an annual value for
the indicator morbidity service burden for a facility. The monthly
head-counts are summed up for the 12 months to get the annual headcount,
while the number of staff for the facility is calculated as the average of
the two 6-monthly values reported through the 6-monthly staff report. So
in this example the data element "OPD headcount" would have the
aggregation operator "SUM" and the data element "Number of staff" would
have it set to "AVERAGE".

Another important feature of average data elements is the validity
period concept. Average data values are standing values for any period
type within the borders of the period they are registered for. For
example, an annual population estimate following the calendar year, will
have the same value for any period that falls within that year no matter
what the period type. If the population under 1 for a given facility is
250 for the year of 2015 that means that the value will be 250 for
Jan-15, for Q3-15, for Week 12 of 2015 and for any period within 2015.
This has implications for how coverage indicators are calculated, as the
full annual population will be used as denominator value even when doing
monthly reports. If you want to look at an estimated annual coverage
value for a given month, then you will have the option of setting the
indicator to "Annualised" which means that a monthly coverage value will
be multiplied by a factor of 12, a quarterly value by 4, in order to
generate an effective yearly total. The annualised indicator feature can
therefore be used to mimic the use of monthly population estimates.

## Coleta de dados vs. análise de dados { #data-collection-vs-data-analysis } 

### Coleta e armazenamento de dados { #data-collection-and-storage } 

Datasets determine what raw data that is available in the system, as
they describe how data is collected in terms of periodicity as well as
spatial extent. Data sets define the building blocks of the data to be
captured and stored in DHIS2. For each data dimension we decide what
level of detail the data should be collected at namely 1) the data
element (e.g. diagnosis, vaccine, or any event taking place) and its
categories (e.g. age and gender), 2) the period/frequency dimension, and
3) the organisation unit dimension. For any report or data analysis you
can never retrieve more detailed data than what is defined in the data
sets, so the design of the datasets and their corresponding data entry
forms (the data collection tools) dictate what kind of data analysis
will be possible.

### A entrada não é igual à saída { #input-does-not-equal-output } 

It is important to understand that the data entry forms or datasets
themselves are not intrinsically linked to the underlying data value and
that the meaning of data is only described by the data element (and its
categories). This makes it perfectly safe to modify datasets and forms
without altering the data (as long as the data elements stay the same).
This loose coupling between forms and data makes DHIS2 flexible when it
comes to designing and changing new forms and in providing exactly the
form the users want.

Another benefit of only linking data to data elements and not to forms,
is the flexibility of creating indicators and validation rules based on
data elements, and also in providing any kind of output report (in pivot
tables, charts, maps etc.) that can combine data individually or across
forms, e.g. to correlate data from different health programs. Due to
this flexibility of enabling integration of data from various programs
(forms) and sources (routine and semi permanent (population, staff,
equipment)) a DHIS2 database is used as an integrated data repository
for many or all parts of the aggregated data in a larger HIS. The figure
below illustrates this flexibility.

![](resources/images/data_dimensions/dhis_input_output.jpg)

In this example, we see that data elements from multiple forms can be
combined to create a given indicator. As a more concrete example, one
might collect "Population under one year of age" in an annual data set
by district, and then collect a data element like "Fully immunized
children" by month at the facility level. By annualizing the population,
we can generate an approximation of the effective monthly population,
and combining this with the aggregate total of the number of fully
immunized children by month, it would be possible to generate an
indicator "Fully immunized coverage", consisting of the aggregated
total of children who are fully immunized, divided by the effective
monthly population.

## Exemplos estendidos de elementos e formulários de dados { #extended-examples-of-data-elements-and-forms } 

The table below combines data element the two group sets Diagnosis (all
the diseases) and Morbidity/Mortality (New cases, Follow-ups, Referrals,
Deaths) with the data element category PHU/Community. Deaths are
captured in a separate form with other dimensions (e.g. the
PHU/Community) than morbidity.

![](resources/images/data_dimensions/Ex_table1.jpg)

This output table combines the two data element categories HIV\_Age and
Gender with the data element group set ART Group. The group enables
subtotals for staging and entry points summing up the data elements in
that group. Subtotals for either age groups and gender would be other
possible columns to easily include here.

![](resources/images/data_dimensions/Ex_table2.jpg)

## Como isso funciona em tabelas dinâmicas { #how-this-works-in-pivot-tables } 

When doing data analysis in Excel pivot tables or any other OLAP based
tool the dimensions become extremely powerful in providing many
different views into the data. Each data element category or group set
become a pivot field, and the options or groups become values within
each of these fields. In fact categories and groupsets are treated
exactly the same way in pivot tables, and so are orgunits, periods, and
data elements. All these become dimensions to the data value that can be
used to rearrange, pivot, filter, and to drill down into the data. Here
we will show some examples of how the data dimensions are used in pivot
tables.

Using the example of morbidity and mortality data, a pivot table can
show how the dimensions can be used to view data for different
aggregation levels.

The completely aggregated number is viewed when none of the pivot fields
are arranged in the table area, as column or row fields, but are listed
above the table itself as page field (filter).

![](resources/images/data_dimensions/pivot_overview_1.jpg)

Here we have selected to look at the Morbidity total. The various data
elements on morbidity have been ordered into the main\_de\_groups
Morbidity (we will get back to Mortality later). The fields above the
table itself are all set to "All", meaning that the totals in the table
will contain data from all Countries, Districts, Chiefdom, ou\_type,
year, months, the various categories as listed in the red fields, and
all data elements in the Morbidity group.

As we have seen, this is not a very useful representation, as Morbidity
is organized into new cases, follow-ups, referrals, and then again in
age groups. Also, we do not see the various diagnoses. The first step is
to include the diagnoses field (which is a group set), which is done by
dragging the "diagnosis" field down to be a row field, as shown in the
figure below, and to add the group set called "morbiditymortality" in
the column field to display new cases, follow-up, and referrals.

![](resources/images/data_dimensions/pivot_diagnoses.jpg)

Compare esta figura acima com a abaixo.

![](resources/images/data_dimensions/pivot_dataelements.jpg)

They both show the same data (some of the rows have been cut in the
screenshot due to image size), albeit in a different way.

  - The "dataelement" field, used in the bottom figure, displays each
    diagnosis as three elements; one follow-up, one new, and one
    referrals. This is the way the data elements have been defined in
    DHIS2, as this makes sense for aggregation. You would not like to
    aggregate follow-ups and new, thus these have not been made as
    categories, the whole point of is to ease aggregation and
    disaggregation.

  - The "diagnosis" group set has instead been made to lump these three
    (follow-up, new, referrals) together, which can then be split with
    another group set, namely the one called "morbiditymortality". This
    allows us to organize the data as in the first of the two figures,
    where we have the single diagnosis per row, and the groups new,
    follow-up, referrals as rows.

The idea of using group sets is that you can combine, in any set,
different data elements. Thus, if we add the mortality data (by checking
it from the drop-down menu of the main\_de\_groups field, and moving
this field out of the table) we can see also the deaths, since the
mortality data elements have been included as a "death" group in the
"morbiditymortality" group set. The result is shown below.

![](resources/images/data_dimensions/pivot_diagnoses_all.jpg)

The result is a much more user-friendly pivot table. Now, another figure
shows the relationship between the group sets and elements (these are
fake data values).

This small detail of the pivot table show how the actual data elements
link to the group sets:

  - The four data elements, as defined in DHIS2, are Measles death,
    Measles follow-up, Measles new, and Measles referrals

  - They all belong to the group set "diagnosis", where they have been
    lumped together in the group Measles

  - The group set "morbiditymortality" contains the groups New cases,
    Follow-up, Referrals, and Deaths.

  - Only the data element Measles deaths has data related to the group
    Deaths, thus this is where the data value (20) is shown, at the
    upper right corner. The same for Measles new; the value (224) is
    shown at the intersection of the data element Measles new and the
    group New cases (in the group set morbiditymortality)

  - All the intersections where the data element does not link with the
    groups in morbiditymortality are left blank. Thus in this case we
    would get a nice table if we excluded the data element from the
    table, and just had diagnosis and the group set morbiditymortality,
    as in the figure shown earlier

Now lets see how the data element categories can be used. In the data
entry form for Morbidity the new cases and follow-ups use one age
category, the referral data another,, and the mortality data a third age
breakup, so these are available as three individual age group fields in
the pivot tables called morbidity\_age, referrals\_age and
mortality\_age. It doesn't make sense to use these while looking at
these data together (as in the examples above), but e.g. if we only want
to look at the only the new cases we can put the MobidityMortalityGroups
field back up as a page field and there select the New cases group as a
filter. Then we can drag the Morbidity\_age field down to the column
area and we get the following view:

![](resources/images/data_dimensions/pivot_morb_age.jpg)

The following table illustrates the benefits of reusing data element
categories across datasets and category combinations. The VCCT, ART and
PMTCT data are collected in three different datasets, the first two with
both gender and age breakdown, and the PMTCT only age (gender is given).
All three share the same age groups and therefore it is possible to view
data elements from all these three datasets in the same table and use
the age dimension. In the previous example with morbidity and mortality
data this was not possible since new cases, referrals and deaths all
have different age groups.

![](resources/images/data_dimensions/pivot_hiv_age.jpg)

In the table below PMTCT data has been removed from the table and the
gender category added to the column area so that you can analyse the
data for VCCT and ART by age and gender. An optional subtotal for gender
has also been added, as well as a grand total for all age and
gender.

![](resources/images/data_dimensions/pivot_hiv_age_gender.jpg)

## Estudo de caso: De formulários em papel a conjuntos de dados multidimensionais - lições aprendidas { #case-study-from-paper-forms-to-multidimensional-datasets-lessons-learned } 

Typically the design of a DHIS2 dataset is based on some requirements
from a paper form that is already in use. The logic of paper forms are
not the same as the data element and data set model of DHIS2, e.g. often
a field in a tabular paper form is described both by column headings and
text on each row, and sometimes also with some introductory table
heading that provides more context. In the database this is captured in
one atomic data element with no reference to a position in a visual
table format, so it is important to make sure the data element with the
optional data element categories capture the full meaning of each
individual field in the paper form.

Another important thing to have in mind while designing datasets is that
the dataset and the corresponding data entry form (which is a dataset
with layout) is a data collection tool and not a report or analysis
tool. There are other far more sophisticated tools for data output and
reporting in DHIS2 than the data entry forms. Paper forms are often
designed with both data collection and reporting in mind and therefore
you might see things such as cumulative values (in addition to the
monthly values), repetition of annual data (the same population data
reported every month) or even indicator values such as coverage rates in
the same form as the monthly raw data. When you store the raw data in
DHIS2 every month and have all the processing power you need within the
computerised tool there is no need (in fact it would be stupid and most
likely cause inconsistency) to register manually calculated values such
as the ones mentioned above. You only want to capture the raw data in
your datasets/forms and leave the calculations to the computer, and
presentation of such values to the reporting tools in
DHIS2.

### De tabelas a combinações de categorias - projetando conjuntos de dados multidimensionais { #from-tables-to-category-combinations-designing-multi-dimensional-data-sets } 

As we have seen in the examples above, data element categories and
category options are helpful in representing tabular data, when adding
dimensions to a field in a paper form. We have also seen how the data
element is one of the required dimensions which describe data in DHIS2.
As we will see in the example below there are often more than one way to
represent a paper form in DHIS2 , and it can be difficult to know which
dimension to represent with a data element name and which to represent
as categories, or even as groups as we have seen above. Here are some
general lessons learned from working with data element and category
combinations:

  - Design your dimensions with data use in mind, not data collection.
    This means that disaggregation of data values at collection time
    should be easily aggregated up along the various dimensions, as in
    adding up to a meaningful total.

  - Reuse dimensions as much as possible as this increases the ability
    to compare disaggregated data (e.g. age groups, fixed/outreach,
    gender).

  - Disaggregation dimensions should add up to a total. In certain
    cases, data elements may be collected a subsets of each other. In
    this case, use of categories to disaggregate the data element should
    not be used. As an example, we might collect "Number of confirmed
    malaria cases" and disaggregate this by "Under 5" and "Over 5". A
    third data element "Number of confirmed malaria cases under 1" might
    also exist on the form. It would seem reasonable then to create
    three age groups : Under 1, Under 5 and Over 5, to describe the
    disaggregation. However, the Under 1 is actually a subset of the
    Under 5 group, and when totalled, would result in duplication. Thus,
    categories should be generally be composed of mutually exclusive
    category options, such that the sum of individual category options
    results in a coherent total.

  - Different levels of dimensions; 1) disaggregation and 2) grouping.
    Disaggregation dimensions dictate how you collect and how detailed
    you store your data, so plan these carefully. The group dimension is
    more flexible and can be changed and added to even after data
    collection (think of it as tagging).

  - It is best to think of how the data would be used in an integrated
    data repository and not how it will actually be collected on forms
    or by programs when designing the meta-data model. Ideally, the same
    type of disaggregation should be used across forms and datasets for
    data elements which will be analysed together, or used to build
    indicators. Reuse definitions so that the database can integrate
    even though the forms themselves might be duplicated (which in
    practice, is often the case).

In order to better explain the approach and the possibilities we present
an example paper form and will walk through it step by step and design
data elements, categories, category options and category combinations.

![](resources/images/data_dimensions/PHUF3.jpg)

This form has many tables and each of them potentially represent a data
element category combination (from now on referred to as a catcombo). As
such there is no restriction on a dataset to only have one set of
dimensions or catcombo, it can have many and as we see above this is
necessary as the dimensions are very different from table to table. In
the following paragraphs, we will analyse how to break down this form
into its component pieces and suggest an implementation pathway in
DHIS2.

**ANC table**. This table in the top left corner is one the simpler ones
in this form. It has two dimensions, the first column with the ANC
activity or service (1st visit, IPT 2nd dose etc) and the second and
third column which represent the place where the service was given with
the two options "Fixed" and "Outreach". Since the ANC service is the key
phenomena to analyse here, and often there is a need for looking at the
total of "ANC 1st visits" no matter where they actually took placed, it
makes a lot of sense to use this dimension as the data element
dimension.

Thus, all items on the first column from "1st ANC" visit to "2nd IPT
dose given by TBA" are represented as individual data elements. The
*where* dimension is represented as a data element category (from now on
referred to as category) with the name "fixed/outreach" with the two
data element category options (from now on catoptions) "fixed" and
"outreach". There is no other dimension here so we add a new catcombo
with the name "Fixed/Outreach" with one category "Fixed/Outreach".
Strictly speaking there is another dimension in this table, and that is
the at PHU or by TBA dimension which is repeated for the two doses of
IPT, but since none of the other ANC services listed have this dimension
it does not seem like a good idea to separate out two data elements from
this table and give them another catcombo with both fixed/outreach and
at PHU/by TBA. reusing the same catcombo for all the ANC services makes
more sense since it will be easier to look at these together in reports
etc. and also the fact that there is not much to lose by repeating the
at PHU or by TBA information as part of the data element name when it is
only for four data elements in a table of eleven data elements.

**DELIVERY table.** This table is more tricky as it has a lot of
information and you can see that not all the rows have the same columns
(some columns are merged and a one field is greyed out/disabled.). If we
start by looking at the first column "Deliveries assisted by" that seems
to be one dimension, but only down to the "Untrained TBA" row, as the
remaining three rows are not related to who assisted the delivery at
all. Another dimension is the place of delivery, either In PHU or in
Community as stated on the top column headings. These deliveries are
further split into the outcome of the delivery, whether it is a live or
still birth, which seems to be another dimension. So if we disregard the
three bottom rows for a moment there seems to be 3 dimensions here, 1)
assisted by, 2) place of delivery, and 3) delivery outcome. The key
decision to make is what to use as the data element, the main dimension,
the total that you will most often use and want easily available in
reports and data analysis.

In this case, the outcome dimension as "Total live births" is a very
commonly used value in many indicators (maternal mortality ratio, births
attended by skilled health personnel etc.). In this case the "Assisted
By" dimension could also have been used without any problem, but the
added value of easily getting the total live births information was the
decisive point for us. This means that from this table (or sub-table of
row 1 to 6) there are only two data elements; "Live births" and "Still
births".

Next, there are two more dimensions, the "PHU/Community" with its two
options and a "Births attended by" with options ("MCH Aides", "SECHN",
"Midwives", "CHO", "Trained TBA", "Untrained TBA"). These two categories
make up the catcombo "Births" which is assigned to the two data elements
"Live births" and "Still births". Considering the final three rows of
the delivery table we can see that "Complicated Deliveries" does not
have the assisted by dimension, but has the place and the outcome. "Low
birth weight" also does not have the assisted by dimension and not the
outcome either. The LLITN given after delivery does not have any
additional dimension at all. Since not any of the three rows can share
catcombo with any other row we decided to represent these fields as so
called flat data elements, meaning data elements with no categories at
all, and simply adding the additional information from the column
headings to the data element name, and therefore ended up with the
following data elements with the default (same as none) catcombo;
"Complicated deliveries in PHU live birth", "Complicated deliveries in
PHU still births", "Complicated deliveries in community live birth",
"Complicated deliveries in community still births", "Low birth weight in
PHU", "Low birth weight in community", and "LLITN given after delivery".

**POST-NATAL CARE table** This table is simple and we used the same
approach as for the ANC table. 3 data elements listed in the first
column and then link these to the catcombo called "fixed/outreach".
Reusing the same category fixed/outreach for these data elements enables
analysis on fixed/outreach together with ANC data and other data using
the same category.

**TT table** This table is somewhat more complex than the previous
examples.We decided to use "TT1", "TT2" ... "TT5" as data elements which
makes it easy to get the total of each one of these. There is
fixed/outreach dimension here, but there is also the "In school place"
that is only applied to the Non-Pregnant, or more correctly to any of
the two as the school immunisation is done whether the girls are
pregnant or not. We consulted the program people behind the form and
found out that it would be OK to register all school TT immunisations as
non-pregnant, which simplifies the model a bit since we can reuse the
"TT1" to "TT5" data elements. So we ended up with a new category called
"TT place" with the three options (Fixed, Outreach, In School), and
another category called "Pregnant/Non-pregnant" with two options. The
new catcombo "TT" is then a combination of these two and applied to the
5 TT data elements. Since we agreed to put all In Schools immunisations
under Non-pregnant in means that the combination of options (Pregnant+In
School) will never be used in any data entry form, and hence become a
possible optioncombo, which is OK. As long as the form is custom
designed then you can choose which combinations of options to use or
not, and therefore it is not a problem to have such passive or unused
catoptions. Having school as one option in the TT place category
simplifies the model and therefore we thought it was worth it. The
alternative would be to create 5 more data elements for "TT1 in school"
... "TT5 in school", but then it would be a bit confusing to add these
together with the "TT1" ..."TT5" plus TT catcombo. Having school as a
place in the TT place category makes it a lot easier to get the total of
TT1.. TT5 vaccines given, which are the most important numbers and most
often used values for data analysis.

**Complications of early and late pregnancy and labour tables** We treat
these two tables as one, and will explain why. These two tables are a
bit confusing and not the best design. The most important data coming
out of these tables are the pregnancy complications and the maternal
deaths. These data elements contain further detail on the cause of the
complication or death (the first column in both tables), as well as a
place of death (in PHU or community), and an outcome of the complication
(when its not a death) that can be either "Managed at PHU" or "
Referred". We decided to create two data elements for these two tables;
"Pregnancy complications", and "Maternal Deaths", and two category
combinations, one for each of the data elements. For the Pregnancy
Complications data element there are two additional dimensions, the
cause of the complication (the combined list of the first column in the
two tables) and the outcome (managed at PHU or Referred), so these are
the categories and options that make up that category combination. For
the "Maternal deaths" data element the same category with the different
causes are used and then another category for the place of death (in PHU
or In community). This way the two data elements can share one category
and it will be easy to derive the total number of pregnancy
complications and maternal deaths. While the list of complications on
the paper form is divided into two (early and late/labour) you can see
that e.g. the malaria in 2nd and 3rd trimester are listed under early,
but in fact are for a later phase of the pregnancy. There is no clear
divide between early and late complications in the form, and therefore
we gave up trying to make this distinction in the database.

**Family Planning Services table** This table has 2 dimensions, the
family planning method (contraceptive) and whether the client is new or
continuing. We ended up with one data element only "Family planning
clients" and then added two categories "FP method" with all the
contraceptives as options, and another category "FP client type" with
new or continuing as options. This way it will be easy to get the total
number of family planning clients which is the major value to look at in
data analysis, and from there you can easily get the details on method
or how many new clients there are.

### Abordagem passo a passo para projetar conjuntos de dados { #step-by-step-approach-to-designing-datasets } 

1.  Identify the different tables (or sub datasets) in the paper form
    that share the same dimensions

2.  Para cada tabela identifique as dimensões que descrevem os campos de dados

3.  Identify the key dimension, the one that makes most sense to look at
    in isolation (when the others are collapsed, summed up). This is
    your data element dimension, the starting point and core of your
    multidimensional model (sub dataset). The data element dimension can
    be a merger of two or more dimensions if that makes more sense for
    data analysis. The key is to identify which total that makes most
    sense to look at alone when the other dimensions are collapsed.

4.  For all other/additional dimensions identify their options, and come
    up with explanatory names for dimensions and their options.

5.  Each of these additional dimensions will be a data element category
    and their options will be category options.

6.  Combine all categories for each sub dataset into one category
    combination and assign this to all the data elements in your table
    (or sub dataset if you like).

7.  When you are done with all the tables (sub datasets), create a
    new dataset and add all the data elements you have identified (in
    the whole paper form) to that dataset.

8.  Your dataset will then consist of a set of data elements that
    are linked to one or more category combinations.



# Dimensões de dados adicionais { #additional_data_dimensions } 

## Sobre dimensões de dados adicionais { #about-additional-data-dimensions } 

DHIS2 has the ability to add dimensions to data in addition to what was
described in the previous chapter. We will call these dimensions
“attribute categories” (ACs). The categories described in the previous
chapter we will call “disaggregation categories” (DCs) to differentiate
them from ACs.

ACs and DCs are quite similar—they work in much the same way, are
accessed through the same part of the maintenance interface, and exist
in the same part of the database. The main difference between them is
what they are connected to. A DC is attached to a data element; however,
an AC is attached to a data set. This means values for all DC options
can be entered on the same data entry screen, whereas you must choose
the AC option before you begin to enter data.

In setting up a system, you could just use DCs and ignore ACs
altogether. However, ACs are a way to simplify data entry screens or
reduce the size of the cross-product of category option combos.

> **Tip**
>
> When you’re deciding which categories should be DCs and which should be
> ACs, here’s a good rubric:
>
>  - Use DCs when you want to use different combinations of categories on
>    different data elements within a data set
>
>  - Use DCs when you want to enter all the category option combinations
>    on one data entry screen
>
>  - Use ACs when you want to use the same combination of categories for
>    all the data in a data set
>
>  - Use ACs when you want to enter only one category option combination
>    on one data entry screen

While we referred to DCs as part of the *what* dimension for simplicity
in the former chapter, it’s actually more complex. Either DCs or ACs can
answer any question about a data element, including *what* (of course),
*who*, *why*, *how*, or even a *where* or a *when* beyond the
organisation unit and period dimensions.

## Crie ou edite uma categoria de atributo e suas opções { #create-or-edit-an-attribute-category-and-its-options } 

The process of creating an attribute category as well as its options and
combinations, is discussed in the section 
[Manage categories](manage_category.html). As noted 
there, disaggregation categories are configured by editing a data
element and attribute categories are configured by editing a data set.

## Data entry with disaggregation categories and attribute categories { #data-entry-with-disaggregation-categories-and-attribute-categories } 

When entering aggregate data, one must first choose the attribute
categories, and then one can enter the data across disaggregation
categories on a single page.

For instance, in the graphic below, the attribute categories are
Implementing Partner (AIDSRelief Consortium) and Project (Improve access
to medicines).  The disaggregation categories are gender
(male/female/etc.), age (<15, 15-24, 25-49, >49).

![](resources/images/maintenance/categories_dataset_attributes.png)

## Analysis with disaggregation categories and attribute categories { #analysis-with-disaggregation-categories-and-attribute-categories } 

In order to do analysis with disaggregation and attribute categories,
check the “Data dimension” box in the category editing screen of the
Maintenance app, as discussed in 
[Create or edit a category](manage_category.html#create_category).

## Approvals with attribute categories { #approvals-with-attribute-categories } 

To include attribute categories in approvals, create a category
option group that contains the same category options as the attribute
category.  Then create a category option group set and add that the
category option group set as a data approval level.

This is covered in more detail in the section
[Approving by category option group set](data_approvals_approving_by_cogs.html) and 
[Approving by multiple category option group sets](approving_by_multiple_category_option_group_sets.html).

## Attribute categories and the datavalue table { #attribute-categories-and-the-datavalue-table } 

For some, the way attribute categories work with disaggregation
categories is clearer when we look at how the data values are stored
in DHIS2’s database. If diving into the database internals doesn’t help
you understand how the different types of categories work together,
please feel free to ignore it.

Each data value is associated with a data element, a period, and an
organisation unit, which are represented in this way:

<table width="100%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 7%" />
<col style="width: 27%" />
<col style="width: 28%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>dataelementid</p></td>
<td><p>periodid</p></td>
<td><p>sourceid</p></td>
<td><p>&nbsp;</p></td>
<td><p>&nbsp;</p></td>
<td><p>&nbsp;</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

(Note these are numeric database ids, not DHIS2 uids.)

And of course, each data value has a value, adding the **value** column
to the database:

<table width="100%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 7%" />
<col style="width: 27%" />
<col style="width: 28%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>dataelementid</p></td>
<td><p>periodid</p></td>
<td><p>sourceid</p></td>
<td><p>value</p></td>
<td><p>&nbsp;</p></td>
<td><p>&nbsp;</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Each data value also references the disaggregation category options
and the attribute category options assigned to it. For instance, in
the example above, the data value entered in the box “Male <15” will
have the option “Male” for the disaggregation category **gender**, and
the option “<15” for the disaggregation category **age**. The
combination of these two options is represented in the database by a
single **category option combination** meaning “Male, <15”. The data
value references this disaggregation category option combination in the
**categoryoptioncomboid**:

<table width="100%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 7%" />
<col style="width: 27%" />
<col style="width: 28%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>dataelementid</p></td>
<td><p>periodid</p></td>
<td><p>sourceid</p></td>
<td><p>value</p></td>
<td><p>categoryoptioncomboid</p></td>
<td><p>&nbsp;</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Likewise, the same data value will have the option “AIDSRelief
Consortium” for the category **Implementing Partner**, and the option
“Improve access to medicines” for the category **Project**. There will
also be a database **category option combination** meaning “Implementing
Partner, Improve access to medicines”. The data value references this
attribute category option combination in the **attributeoptioncomboid**:

<table width="100%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 18%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 7%" />
<col style="width: 27%" />
<col style="width: 28%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>dataelementid</p></td>
<td><p>periodid</p></td>
<td><p>sourceid</p></td>
<td><p>value</p></td>
<td><p>categoryoptioncomboid</p></td>
<td><p>attributeoptioncomboid</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

> **Note**
>
> The above column list does not include all of the columns in the
datavalue table.

If you have not defined a disaggregation category combination for a data
element, the categoryoptioncomboid will reference a “default” category
option combination, which is defined internally in DHIS2 as the category
default with the option default (the only option in the default
category). Likewise, if you have not defined an attribute category
combination for the dataset in which you enter the data, the
attributeoptioncomboid references the same “default” category option
combination.

We hope this investigation of how data values are stored in DHIS2’s
database makes it clearer how data values can be associated with various
groups of category options, both from disaggregation categories and
attribute categories.



# Modelo de relacionamento { #relationship_model } 
 <!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:relationship_model-->

Um relacionamento representa um link entre duas entidades no modelo Tracker. Um relacionamento é considerado dado no DHIS2 e é baseado em um Tipo de Relacionamento, semelhante a como uma Instância de Entidade Rastreada é baseada em um Tipo de Entidade Rastreada.

Os relacionamentos sempre incluem duas entidades, e essas entidades podem incluir Instâncias de entidades rastreadas, inscrições e eventos, e qualquer combinação deles. Observe que nem todas essas combinações estão disponíveis nos aplicativos atuais.

In addition, relationships can be defined as unidirectional or bidirectional.
The only functional difference is currently that these requires different levels
of access to create. Unidirectional relationships requires the user to have data
write access to the "from" entity and data read access for the "to" entity,
while bidirectional relationships require data write access for both sides.

## Tipo de Relacionamento { #relationship_model_relationship_type } 
 <!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:relationship_model_relationship_type-->

A Relationship Type is the definition of the properties a relationship have.
Relationships always consists of two sides, referred to as "from" and "to", and
what entities can be contained for each side is determined by the Relationship
Type. The properties that determine what each can contain are called
constraints, fromConstraint and toConstraint respectively. These constraints are
significant when working with the data later, to understand what a relationship
can and cannot contain.

Each of the constraints defined in the Relationship Type consists of several
properties. The primary property is the relationship entity, which decides what
kind of entities the relationship can contain. The entities can be one of the
following for each constraint:

* Instância de entidade rastreada
* Inscrição
* Evento

Depending on the kind of relationship entity you select, you can choose
additional limitations for each constraint. The following table explains the
different combinations you can configure:

|                     | Instância de entidade rastreada | Inscrição | Evento    |
|---------------------|-------------------------|------------|----------|
| Tipo de entidade rastreada | Requerido                | Opcional   | -        |
| Programa             | -                       | Requerido   | -        |
| Estágio do Programa       | -                       | Requerido   | Opcional |

These additional limitations, will require the entity to match the limitation
set before it can be created. For example, if your relationship is between a
mother and a child, both constraints would have their required Tracked Entity
Type set to Person and could optionally set the Enrollment to Maternal Health
Program and Child Program respectively. This way, only Tracked Entity Instances
who are of type Person and who is enrolled in the required program is allowed to
be included in these relationships.

In addition to the constrains a Relationship Type can have, each relationship
can be set to bidirectional, true or false. If the property is set to false, the
relationships are treated as unidirectional. As previously mentioned, the only
functional difference between these relationships are how strict the access is
when creating or updating them - bidirectional being the strictest. Relationships 
are also presented differently in the UI based on whether or not the relationship 
is bidirectional or unidirectional.

One important thing to note about bidirectional relationships, are that the
"from" and "to" sides are still significant in the database, meaning each entity
must match the constraint for that side. However, from a user perspective, which
side each entity is stored as is insignificant.



# Glossário DHIS2 { #dhis2_glossary }

## A { #a } 

Aggregation
:   In the context of DHIS2, aggregation refers to how data elements are
    combined within a particular hierarchical relationship. As an
    example, all the health facilities in a particular district would
    contribute to the total value for the particular district in
    question. Different aggregation operators are supported within
    DHIS2, such as SUM, AVERAGE, and COUNT.

Analytics
:   Analytics refers to the process which processes and prepares data
    which has been entered into DHIS2 into a format which is more
    suitable for retrieving indicators and aggregated data. When data is
    entered into DHIS2, it is stored in a format which is optimized for
    writing the data. However, when data needs to be processed into
    indicators or aggregated (e.g from months to quarters), it is more
    efficient to transform and store this data in a different format
    which is optimized for read-only operations. The analytics system of
    DHIS2 is used extensively by the analytics apps (GIS, Pivot Table,
    Event reports, etc.).

    It is important to keep in mind that because the data which has been
    entered into DHIS2 must be processed into the analytics format, the
    data which appears in the analytics apps only represents the data
    which was present in the system the last time analytics was run. If
    data has been entered after that, analytics will need to be run
    again for this data to appear in the analytics apps.

Aggregate data
:   In the context of DHIS2, aggregate data refers to either data
    elements or indicators that have been derived from other
    hierarchical data sources. For instance, aggregate facility data
    would result from the aggregate totals of all patients that have
    attended that facility for a particular service. Aggregate district
    data would result from the aggregate totals of all facilities
    contained with a particular district.

Application programming interface
:   An application programming interface is a specification of how
    different software components should interact with each other. The
    DHIS2 API (or WebAPI) can be used to interface DHIS2 with other
    software, to build reports or custom data entry forms.

Approvals
:   Approvals can be used to control the visibility and editibility of
    data. When data is submitted from the lowest reporting level, it can
    be approved by the next higher level. This approval has two effects:

    1.  Data is no longer able to be edited in the data entry screens at
        the lower level.

    2.  Depending on the system settings which have been enabled, the
        data will become visible at the approval level.

    As an example, data is entered at the facility level, and the
    submitted for approval. Once the data has been approved at the
    district level, the data will become locked in the data entry
    screens for the facility level. It will also become visible in the
    analytics apps to district users.

## B { #b } 

Bi-monthly
:   Refers to a two-month period, such as January 1st to February 28th.

## C { #c } 

Category
:   Categories are groups of category options. The are used in
    combinations to disaggregate data elements. Categories are typically
    a single type of concept, such as "Age" or "Gender".

Category combinations
:   Category combinations are used to disaggregate data elements. As an
    example, the data element "Number of confirmed cases of malaria"
    could be disaggregated subdivided into to categories: "Age" and
    "Gender". In turn each of these categories, would consist of several
    category options, such as "Male" and "Female" for the gender
    category. Category combinations may consist of one or several
    categories.

Category combination options
:   Category combination options are dynamically composed of all of the
    different combinations of category options which compose a category
    combination. As an example, two categories "Gender" and "Age", might
    have options such as "Male" or "Female" and "<5 years" or ">5 years".
    The category combination options would then consist of:

    - Male <5 years
    - Male >5 years
    - Female <5 years
    - Female >5 years

Category option
:   Category options are atomic elements that are grouped into
    categories.

Comma separated values
:   Comma separated values are series of tabular data stored in a
    plain-text format. They are commonly used with DHIS2 to export and
    import data values.

## D { #d } 

Data dictionary
:   A collection of data elements and indicators, which can be exchanged
    with other DHIS2 systems. Typically used to define a set of data
    elements and indicators when setting up the DHIS2 system.

Data exchange format
:   In the context of DHIS2, the "data exchange format" refers to a XML
    schema that enables the transportation of data and meta-data between
    disconnected DHIS2 instances, as well as between different
    applications that support the DXF schema.

Datamart
:   A set of database tables in DHIS2 that contains processed data
    elements and indicator values that is generated based on aggregation
    rules and calculated data element and indicator formulae. Datamart
    tables are used for analysis and report production. Typically, users
    should not work directly with unaggregated data values, but rather
    with values that have resulted from a datamart export for analysis.

Data element
:   A data element is the fundamental building block of DHIS2. It is an
    atomic unit of data with well-defined meaning. Essentially it is a
    data value that has been actually observed or recorded which is
    further characterized by a number of dimensions. As an example the
    data element "Number of fully immunized children" would refer to the
    number of children that received this particular service. Data
    elements are always linked to a period as well as an organizational
    unit. They optionally may be linked to other dimensions.

Data element group
:   Data element groups are used to categorize multiple data elements
    according to a common theme, such as "Immunization" or "ART".
    Typically, they are used during reporting and analysis to allow
    related data elements to be analysed together.

Data element group sets
:   Data element groups are used to categorize multiple data element
    groups into a common theme.

Dimension
:   A dimension is used to categorize data elements during analysis.
    Dimensions provide a mechanism to group and filter data based on
    common characteristics. Typically, related data elements may be
    aggregated or filtered during analysis with the use of dimensions.
    Dimensions may be a member of a hierarchy. For instance the "Period"
    dimension may be broken down into "Day-\>Month-\>Quarter-\>Year".

DXF

## H { #h } 

Health management information system
:   Typically, an electronic database system that is used to record
    aggregated data on service delivery, disease incidence, human
    resource data and other information used to evaluate the performance
    of delivery of health services. Typically, an HMIS does not contain
    the highly detailed data of electronic medical record systems or
    individual patient data.

## I { #i } 

Indicator
:   The divisor of an indicator. Can be composed of multiple data
    elements with the use of an indicator formula.

    \[
    Indicator = {\frac{Numerator}{Denominator}}
    \]

    This is obviously a very generalized example. The numerator and
    indicator themselves can be composed of various data elements,
    factors, and the four basic operands (addition, multiplication,
    division and subtraction).

## N { #n } 

Numerator
:   The dividend of a indicator. Can be composed of multiple data
    elements and factors with the use of indicator formulas.

## O { #o } 

Organisational unit
:   An organisational unit is usually a geographical unit, which exists
    within a hierarchy. As an example, in the United States, "Georgia"
    would be considered an organisational unit with in the orgunit level
    of "State". Organizational units can also be used to specify an
    administrative unit, such as a ward within a hospital. The
    organisational unit dimension specifies essentially *where* a
    particular data value occurs.

Organisational unit level
:   Refers to a level within an organizational hierarchy. Typically,
    countries are administered at different levels, such as 1) Country
    2) States 3) Counties 4) Health facilities. In the context of DHIS2,
    health facilities typically are the lowest orgunit level. Data is
    aggregated upwards from the lowest orgunit level to the highest.

## P { #p } 

Period
:   A period is a specific time interval which consists of a start date
    and end date. For instance "January 2011" would refer to the time
    interval of January 1st 2011-January 31st 2011.

## U { #u } 

Unique identifier
:   A unique identifier (UID) is a semi-random series of letters and
    numbers used by DHIS2 to identify specific resources. UIDs begin
    with a letter, and are followed by exactly 10 letters or digits.



# About demo server, D2 cluster and database design { #moare_about_dhis2_server_database } 

## Usando o servidor de demonstração DHIS2 { #using-the-dhis2-demo-server } 

The DHIS2 team maintains a demonstration server at
<https://play.dhis2.org/demo>. This is by far the easiest way to try out
DHIS2. Simply open the link in your web browser and login with username
= admin and password = district.

> **Note**
>
> All changes on this server are deleted each night, so do not save any
> important work on this server. It is strictly for demonstration
> purposes on only\!

## Spinning up a local DHIS2 instance using D2 Cluster  { #mod2_1 } 

### Running D2 Cluster { #running-d2-cluster } 

Using Docker containers to run a d2 cluster is an easy way to get started with DHIS2 on
your local computer. This approach is appropriate for a stand-alone
installation and demos. Simply follow the guide
[here](https://developers.dhis2.org/docs/guides/spin-up-local-instance).

#### Prerequisites to running D2 Cluster { #prerequisites-to-running-d2-cluster } 

You must be sure that you have installed [Yarn](https://classic.yarnpkg.com/en/docs/install/) and [Nodejs](https://nodejs.org/en/). A current version of [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) must be
installed on your machine as well. Please refer to the [guide](https://developers.dhis2.org/docs/guides/spin-up-local-instance) for detailed information.

### Baixando e instalando a versão do servidor { #downloading-and-installing-the-server-version } 

The latest stable server version can be downloaded from this
[website](http://stable.dhis2.org/). For detailed information on how to
install it please refer to the installation chapter in the
implementation manual.

## Conectando-se ao DHIS2 { #mod2_2 } 

Regardless of whether you have installed the server version or ran a DHIS2 instance locally, you will use a web-browser to log on to the
application. DHIS2 should be compatible with most modern web-browsers,
although you will need to ensure that Java Script is enabled.

To log on to the application just enter <http://localhost:8080/dhis> if
you are using the DHIS2 live package, or replace `localhost` with the
name or IP address of the server where the server version is installed.

Once you have started DHIS2, either on-line or off-line, the displayed
screen will prompt you to enter your registered user-name and password.
After entering the required information click on log-in button to log
into the application. The default user name and password are 'admin' and
'district'. They should be changed immediately upon logging on the first
time.

![](resources/images/getting_started/login.png)

You can select the language which you wish to display DHIS2 in from the
"Change language" dialog box at the bottom of the screen. Not all
languages may be available.

Should you have forgotten your password, you can click on the "Forgot
password?" link. You must have informed DHIS2 of your email address and
the server must be properly configured to send emails.

If you want to create your own account (and the server administrator
allows this), simply click "Create an account" and follow the directions
provided.

Once you have logged into DHIS2, refer to the specific sections in this
manual for the different functionality which is available.

## Saindo do DHIS2 { #mod2_4 } 

Just click on the Profile and the click "Log out" the top-right corner
of the DHIS2 menu.

## Introdução rápida para projetar um banco de dados DHIS2 { #database_design } 

DHIS2 provides a powerful set of tools for data collection, validation,
reporting and analysis, but the contents of the database, e.g., what to
collect, who should collect it and on what format will depend on the
context of use. However, in order to do anything with DHIS2, you must
first create meta-data. Meta-data, or data about the data, describes
what should be collected (data elements and categories), where it should
be collected (organisation units) and how frequently it should be
collected (periods). This meta-data needs to be created in the DHIS2
database before it can be used. This can be done through the user
interface and requires no programming or in-depth technical skills of
the software, but does require a good understanding of the processes
which you are trying to collect data form.

This section will provide a very quick and brief introduction to DHIS2
database design and mainly explain the various steps needed to prepare a
new DHIS2 system for use. How to do each step is explained in other
chapters, and best practices on design choices will be explained in the
implementers manual. Here are the steps to follow:

1 \. Configure uma hierarquia organizacional

2 \. Defina os elementos de dados

3 \. Definir conjuntos de dados e formulários de entrada de dados

4 \. Definir regras de validação

5 \. Definir indicadores

6 \. Definir tabelas de relatório e relatórios de design

7 \. Configure o módulo GIS

8 \. Projete gráficos e personalize o painel

### A hierarquia organizacional { #the-organisational-hierarchy } 

The organisational hierarchy defines the organisation using the DHIS2,
the health facilities, administrative areas and other geographical areas
used in data collection and data analysis. This *where* dimension to the data is
defined as a hierarchy with one root unit (e.g., Ministry of Health) and
any number of levels and nodes below. Each node in this hierarchy is
called an organisational unit in DHIS2.

The design of this hierarchy will determine the geographical units of
analysis available to the users as data is collected and aggregated in
this structure. There can only be one organisational hierarchy at the
same time so its structure needs careful consideration. Additional
hierarchies (e.g. parallel administrative groupings such as "Facility
ownership") can be modelled using organisational groups and group sets,
however the organisational hierarchy is the main vehicle for data
aggregation on the geographical dimension. Typically national
organisational hierarchies in public health have 4-6 levels, but any
number of levels is supported. The hierarchy is built up of parent-child
relations, e.g. a Country or MoH unit (the root) might have e.g. 8
parent units (provinces), and each province again ( at level 2) might
have 10-15 districts as their children. Normally the health facilities
will be located at the lowest level, but they can also be located at
higher levels, e.g. national or provincial hospitals, so skewed
organisational trees are supported (e.g. a leaf node can be positioned
at level 2 while most other leaf nodes are at level 5).

Typically there is a geographical hierarchy defined by the health
system. e.g. where the administrative offices are located (e.g. MoH,
province, district), but often there are other administrative boundaries
in the country that might or might not be added, depending on how its
boundaries will improve data analysis. When designing the hierarchy the
number of children for any organisational unit may indicate the
usefulness of the structure, e.g. having one or more 1-1 relationships
between two levels is not very useful as the values will be the same for
the child and the parent level. On the other extreme a very high number
of children in the middle of the hierarchy (e.g. 50 districts in a
province) might call for an extra level to be added in between to
increase the usefulness of data analysis. The lowest level, the health
facilities will often have a large number of children (10-60), but for
other levels higher up in the hierarchy approx. 5-20 children is
recommended. Too few or too many children might indicate that a level
should be removed or added.

Note that it is quite easy to make changes to the upper levels of the
hierarchy at a later stage, the only problem is changing organisational
units that collect data (the leaf nodes), e.g. splitting or merging
health facilities. Aggregation up the hierarchy is done based on the
current hierarchy at any time and will always reflect the most recent
changes to the organisational structure. Refer to the chapter on
Organisation Units to learn how to create organisational units and to
build up the hierarchy.

### Elementos de Dados { #data-elements } 

The Data Element is perhaps the most important building block of a DHIS2
database. It represents the *what* dimension, it explains what is being
collected or analysed. In some contexts this is referred to an
indicator, but in DHIS2 we call this unit of collection and analysis a
*data element*. The data element often represents a count of something,
and its name describes what is being counted, e.g. "BCG doses given" or
“Malaria cases”. When data is collected, validated, analysed, reported
or presented, the data elements or expressions built upon data
elements describes what the data is. As such the data elements
become important for all aspects of the system and they decide not only
how data is collected, but more importantly how the data values are
represented in the database, which again decides how data can be
analysed and presented.

It is possible to add more details to this *what* dimension through the
disaggregation dimension called data element categories. Some common
categories are age and gender, but any category can be added by the user
and linked to specific data elements. The combination of a data
element's name and its assigned category defines the smallest unit of
collection and analysis available in the system, and hence describes the
raw data in the database. Aggregations can be done when zooming out of
this dimension, but no further drill-down is possible, so designing data
elements and categories define the detail of the analysis available to
the system (on the *what* dimension). Changes to data elements and
categories at a later stage in the process might be complicated as these
will change the meaning of the data values already captured in the
database (if any). So this step is one of the more decisive and careful
steps in the database design process.

One best practice when designing data elements is to think of data
elements as a unit of data analysis and not just as a field in the data
collection form. Each data element lives on its own in the database,
completely detached from the collection form, and reports and other
outputs are based on data elements and expressions/formulas composed of
data elements and not the data collection forms. So the data analysis
needs should drive the process, and not the look an feel of the data
collection forms. A simple rule of thumb is that the name of the data
element must be able to stand on its own and describe the data value
also outside the context of its collection form. E.g. a data element
name like "Total referrals" makes sense when looking at it in either the
"RCH" form or the "OPD" form, but on its own it does not uniquely
describe the phenomena (who are being referred?), and should in stead be
called "Total referrals from Maternity" or "Total referrals from OPD".
Two different data elements with different meanings, although the field
on the paper form might only say "Total referrals" since the user of the
form will always know where these referrals come from. In a database or
a repository of data elements this context is no longer valid and
therefore the names of the data elements become so important in
describing the data.

Common properties of data elements can be modelled through what is
called data element groups. The groups are completely flexible in the
sense that they are defined by the user, both their names and their
memberships. Groups are useful both for browsing and presenting related
data, but can also be used to aggregate data elements together. Groups
are loosely coupled to data elements and not tied directly to the data
values which means they can be modified and added at any point in time
without interfering with the raw data.

### Conjuntos de dados e formulários de entrada de dados { #datasets-and-data-entry-forms } 

All data entry in DHIS2 is organised through the use of Datasets. A
Dataset is a collection of data elements grouped together for data
collection, and in the case of distributed installs they also define
chunks of data for export and import between instances of DHIS2 (e.g.
from a district office local installation to a national server).
Datasets are not linked directly to the data values, only through their
data elements and frequencies, and as such a dataset can be modified,
deleted or added at any point in time without affecting the raw data
already captured in the system, but such changes will of course affect
how new data will be collected.

A dataset has a period type which controls the data collection
frequency, which can be daily, weekly, monthly, quarterly, six-monthly,
or yearly. Both which data elements to include in the dataset and the
period type is defined by the user, together with a name, short name,
and code.

In order to use a dataset to collect data for a specific orgunit you
must assign the orgunit to the dataset, and this mechanism controls
which orgunits that can use which datasets, and at the same time defines
the target values for data completeness (e.g. how many health facilities
in a district expected to submit RCH data every month).

A data element can belong to multiple datasets, but this requires
careful thinking as it may lead to overlapping and inconstant data being
collected if e.g. the datasets are given different frequencies and are
used by the same orgunits.

#### Formulários de entrada de dados { #data-entry-forms } 

Once you have assigned a dataset to an orgunit that dataset will be made
available in Data Entry (under Services) for the orgunits you have
assigned it to and for the valid periods according to the dataset's
period type. A default data entry form will then be shown, which is
simply a list of the data elements belonging to the dataset together
with a column for inputting the values. If your dataset contains data
elements with categories such as age groups or gender, then additional
columns will be automatically generated in the default form based on the
categories. In addition to the default list-based data entry form there
are two more alternatives, the section-based form and the custom form.

##### Formulários de seção { #section-forms } 

Section forms allow for a bit more flexibility when it comes to using
tabular forms and are quick and simple to design. Often your data entry
form will need multiple tables with subheadings, and sometimes you need
to disable (grey out) a few fields in the table (e.g. some categories do
not apply to all data elements), both of these functions are supported
in section forms. After defining a dataset you can define it's sections
with subsets of data elements, a heading and possible grey fields i the
section's table. The order of sections in a dataset can also be defined.
In Data Entry you can now start using the Section form (should appear
automatically when sections are available for the selected dataset). You
can switch between default and section forms in the top right corner of
the data entry screen. Most tabular data entry forms should be possible
to do with sections forms, and the more you can utilise the section
forms (or default forms) the easier it is for you. If these two types of
forms are not meeting your requirements then the third option is the
completely flexible, although more time-consuming, custom data entry
forms.

##### Formulários Personalizados { #custom-forms } 

When the form you want to design is too complicated for the default or
section forms then your last option is to use a custom form. This takes
more time, but gives you full flexibility in term of the design. In
DHIS2 there is a built in HTML editor (FcK Editor) for the form designer
and you can either design the form in the UI or paste in your HTML
directly using the Source window in the editor. In the custom form you
can insert static text or data fields (linked to data elements +
category) in any position on the form and you have complete freedom to
design the layout of the form. Once a custom form has been added to a
dataset it will be available in data entry and used automatically. You
can switch back to default and section (if exists) forms in the top
right corner of the data entry screen.

### Regras de validação { #validation-rules } 

Once you have set up the data entry part of the system and started to
collect data then there is time to define data quality checks that help
to improve the quality of the data being collected. You can add as many
validation rules as you like and these are composed of left and right
side expressions that again are composed of data elements, with an
operator between the two sides. Typical rules are comparing subtotals to
totals of something. E.g. if you have two data elements "HIV tests
taken" and "HIV test result positive" then you know that in the same
form (for the same period and organisational unit) the total number of
tests must always be equal or higher than the number of positive tests.
These rules should be absolute rules meaning that they are
mathematically correct and not just assumptions or "most of the time
correct". The rules can be run in data entry, after filling each form,
or as a more batch like process on multiple forms at the same time, e.g.
for all facilities for the previous reporting month. The results of the
tests will list all violations and the detailed values for each side of
the expression where the violation occurred to make it easy to go back
to data entry and correct the values.

### Indicadores { #indicators } 

Indicators represent perhaps the most powerful data analysis feature of
the DHIS2. While data elements represent the raw data (counts) being
collected the indicators represent formulas providing coverage rates,
incidence rates, ratios and other formula-based units of analysis. An
indicator is made up of a factor (e.g. 1, 100, 100, 100 000), a
numerator and a denominator, the two latter are both expressions based
on one or more data elements. E.g. the indicator "BCG coverage \<1 year"
is defined a formula with a factor 100, a numerator ("BCG doses given to
children under 1 year") and a denominator ("Target population under 1
year"). The indicator "DPT1 to DPT3 drop out rate" is a formula of 100 %
x ("DPT1 doses given"- "DPT3 doses given") / ("DPT1 doses given").

Most report modules in DHIS2 support both data elements and indicators
and you can also combine these in custom reports, but the important
difference and strength of indicators versus raw data (data element's
data values) is the ability to compare data across different
geographical areas (e.g. highly populated vs rural areas) as the target
population can be used in the denominator.

Indicators can be added, modified and deleted at any point in time
without interfering with the data values in the database.

### Tabelas de relatórios e relatórios { #report-tables-and-reports } 

Standard reports in DHIS2 are a very flexible way of presenting the data
that has been collected. Data can be aggregated by any organisational
unit or orgunit level, by data element, by indicators, as well as over
time (e.g. monthly, quarterly, yearly). The report tables are custom
data sources for the standard reports and can be flexibly defined in the
user interface and later accessed in external report designers such as
iReport or through custom HTML reports. These report designs can then be
set up as easily accessible one-click reports with parameters so that
the users can run the same reports e.g. every month when new data is
entered, and also be relevant to users at all levels as the
organisational unit can be selected at the time of running the report.

### GIS { #gis } 

In the integrated GIS module you can easily display your data on maps,
both on polygons (areas) and as points (health facilities), and either
as data elements or indicators. By providing the coordinates of your
organisational units to the system you can quickly get up to speed with
this module. See the GIS section for details on how to get started.

### Gráficos e painel { #charts-and-dashboard } 

On of the easiest way to display your indicator data is through charts.
An easy to use chart dialogue will guide you through the creation of
various types of charts with data on indicators, organisational units
and periods of your choice. These charts can easily be added to one of
the four chart sections on your dashboard and there be made easily
available right after log in. Make sure to set the dashboard module as
the start module in user settings.



# Tutoriais DHIS2 { #dhis2_tutorials } 

## Crie Scorecards usando o aplicativo Pivot Table { #create-scorecards-pivot-table } 

**Scorecards definition:** In public health settings such as Ministries
of Health, scorecards offer a useful and standardized method for
combining related indicators into one table. A scorecard gives an
overall view of the performance of a health program such as a
vaccination program, highlighting successes, weaknesses, and areas for
improvement Here's what a typical scorecard looks like:

![](resources/images/tutorials/scorecards_pivot_result.png)

Este tutorial explica como criar um scorecard no aplicativo Tabela Dinâmica DHIS2. Existem várias vantagens em usar a Tabela Dinâmica para criar um scorecard, como:

  - Você pode salvar o scorecard no painel e usá-lo offline.

  - Você pode compartilhar o scorecard com outros usuários DHIS2.

Vamos começar\!

### Crie uma legenda para sua visão geral { #create-a-legend-for-your-scorecard } 

Primeiro, criaremos uma legenda de "semáforo" de três cores para o scorecard. Com três cores básicas, o scorecard é fácil de digitalizar e entender.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app. Click the menu in the top right corner
    and select Maintenance from the list of apps. You can also type the
    first letters of the word maintenance in the search field to find
    the app.

    ![](resources/images/tutorials/scorecards_maintenance_app.png)

2.  In the Maintenance app, scroll to the bottom of the page right down
    to the **Other** section.

3.  Vá para ** Legenda ** e clique em ** + **.

    ![](resources/images/tutorials/scorecards_maintenance_legend.png)

4.  In the **Legend Management** page, scroll to the bottom of the page
    and create a new legend by clicking the blue + button.

    ![](resources/images/tutorials/scorecards_maintenance_addbtn.png)

5.  Enter a name for the legend such as “Traffic light”, a start value
    and an end value in the fields. The values you enter here depend on
    the performance ratings you wish to set for the scorecard.

6.  Change **Number of legend items** to 3 to display three colors in
    the scorecard. To change the legend item colors, click the blue +
    button and then edit the
    colors.

    ![](resources/images/tutorials/scorecards_maintenance_legend_color.png)

### Crie um scorecard no aplicativo Pivot Table { #create-a-scorecard-in-the-pivot-table-app } 

1.  Open the **Pivot Table** app from the top right menu of the
    dashboard. You can also enter the first letters of Pivot Table in
    the search field.

2.  Go to **Data** in the pane on the left side and select
    **Indicators** in the list.

3.  Selecione um ** grupo Indicador ** como “ANC” na segunda lista.

4.  Using the arrows, select the type of indicators you want to see in
    your scorecard.

    ![](resources/images/tutorials/scorecards_pivot_indicators.png)

5.  Click **Update**. This button is in the menu at the top of the
    workspace

6.  Go to **Periods** and select a period for which you want to display
    data. In this “traffic light” example, we’ll use the relative period
    section. In **Quarters**, select **This quarter**and **Last
    quarter**. Clear any other checkboxes and click **Update**.

    ![](resources/images/tutorials/scorecards_pivot_period.png)

7.  Go to **Organisation Units** in the same left side pane, and click
    the arrow next to the gear button.

8.  Selecione ** Selecionar níveis **.

    ![](resources/images/tutorials/scorecards_pivot_orgunit_level.png)

9.  Select **District** from the list (next to the gear button). Click
    **Update**.

    ![](resources/images/tutorials/scorecards_pivot_orgunit_level2.png)

As you can see, the scorecard is starting to take shape in the
workspace. Now it’s time to fine-tune the look and feel.

### Organize o layout e a exibição de seu scorecard { #organise-the-layout-and-display-of-your-scorecard } 

1.  Na área de trabalho, clique em ** Layout **.

    ![](resources/images/tutorials/scorecards_pivot_layout.png)

2.  In **Table layout**, drag **Organisation units** down to the **Row
    dimensions** section.

3.  Arraste ** Dados ** para a seção ** Dimensões da coluna **.

4.  In the **Column dimensions** pane, drag **Periods** below **Data**,
    and click **Update**.

5.  Na área de trabalho, clique em ** Opções **.

    ![](resources/images/tutorials/scorecards_pivot_options.png)

6.  Vá para ** Dados ** e desmarque todas as caixas de seleção.

7.  Go to **Style** \> **Legend set** and from the list, select the
    legend you created in the Maintenance app. In this example, we
    called it Traffic light.

8.  Go to **Style** \> **Legend display style** and select **Background
    color**.

9.  Clique em ** Actualizar **.

O Scorecard está pronto \!


![](resources/images/tutorials/scorecards_pivot_result.png)

### Salve e compartilhe sua visão geral { #save-and-share-your-scorecard } 

1.  Na área de trabalho, vá para o menu ** Favoritos **.

2.  Clique em ** Salvar como **. Insira um nome para o seu Scorecard.

3.  Para compartilhar seu Scorecard, selecione ** Favoritos **.

4.  Enter the name of a user group name, and click **Save**. Your
    scorecard can be viewed by people that you share a dashboard with.

## Trabalhando com TextPattern { #working-with-textpattern } 

TextPattern was introduced in DHIS2 version 2.29, as a way of defining a
pattern that includes variables, generated values and raw text, which
then could be generated into a text value. The current use-case for
TextPattern is automatically generated attributes for tracked entities,
where you want to generate for example unique ids based on a specific
pattern.

This guide will cover both basic and advanced topics for working with
TextPattern, but is mainly focused on how you can define TextPatterns
and which limitations and caveats exists.

### Sintaxe TextPattern { #textpattern-syntax } 

A TextPattern is a sequence of *segments*, joined together by the "+"
character. A segment has a specific notation and in most cases a
parameter *format*, which allows for further manipulation of the value.



Table: TextPattern segments

| Segment notation | Descrição | Paramenter (format) | Example (segment → input value → result) |
|---|---|---|-----|
| "Plain text" | The plain text segment will remain unchanged in all generated values. This special segment is defined by wrapping text between two double quotes. If your pattern should include separation symbols like a dash, you should use this "-". <br>The plain text segment also allows for placeholder text. That means you can specify that parts of the plain text segment should be any of a set of characters. Currently there are 4 supported special characters you can use:<br>* \d (0-9)<br>* \x (a-z)<br>* \X (A-Z)<br>* \w (a-zA-Z0-9) | Nenhum | "Hello world" → None → Hello world <br>"Hello \x\x\x" → "Hello you" → Hello you<br> <br>"\d\d\d" → "123" → 123 |
| CURRENT_DATE(format) | Current date segment will be generated by the server at the time of generation. This is useful if you want your patterns to have a time-constraint that is disconnected from the context. You should not use this if you need to control which date is injected into the pattern. | Date format | CURRENT_DATE(yyyy) → 01-01-2018 → 2018 |
| ORG_UNIT_CODE(format) | This segment represents the organisation unit code associated with the generation. | Text format | ORG_UNIT_CODE(...) → OSLO → OSL |
| RANDOM(format) | Random segments will be replaced by a value randomly generated by the server based on the format. Generated segments, like Random, bases its uniqueness on the rest of the pattern. That means a random value can appear twice, as long as the rest of the pattern is different, which means the generated text as a whole will be unique. | Generation format | RANDOM(X####) → None → A1234 |
| SEQUENTIAL(format) | Sequential segments will be replaced by a number, based on a counting value on the server. Sequential segments will start at the value 1, and for each generated value count up until no more values are available, based on the format. Like Random segments, uniqueness is based on the rest of the pattern, so each possible version of the pattern will have it's own sequential counter starting from 1. | Generation format | "A"+SEQUENTIAL(###) → None → A001 <br>"A"-SEQUENTIAL(###) → None → A002<br> <br>"B"-SEQUENTIAL(###) → None → B001<br> <br>"B"-SEQUENTIAL(###) → None → B002 |

Most segments has a parameter *format*, except for the plain text
segment. The following table lists the available formats, how they are
used and example notations using them.



Table: Parameter formats

| Formato | Descrição | Exemplo |
|---|---|---|
| Date format | This format is based directly on the java SimpleDateFormat, which means any pattern valid for SimpleDateFormat, will be valid as a date format in TextPattern | CURRENT_DATE(dd-MM-yyyy) → 31-12-2018 <br>CURRENT_DATE(MM-yyyy) → 12-2018 |
| Text format | The text format allows for some basic text manipulation. Leaving the format empty will return the value unmodified, but using "^", "." and "\$", you can modify the value before it is returned. Each "." represents a character, while "^" represents the start of the text and "\$" represents the end. When using formats, the input value must be at least the same length as the format. | ORG_UNIT_CODE(....) → OSLO<br> <br>ORG_UNIT_CODE(..) → OS<br> <br>ORG_UNIT_CODE(..\$) → LO<br> <br>ORG_UNIT_CODE(^...\$) → OSLO<br> <br>^....\$ will require the input value to be exactly 4 characters. |
| Generation format | The generation format accepts a combination of one or more of he following characters: "#", "X", "x" and "\*". They respectively represent a number(0-9), an uppercase letter (A-Z), a lowercase letter(a-z) or any of the above(0-9,a-z,A-Z). The SEQUENTIAL segment only accepts "#", since it will only generate numbers. The number of characters in the format decides the size of the value generated. Using just one "#" will in other words only allow for 10 values (0-9), while "###" will allow for 1000 values (000-999). SEQUENTIAL generated values have leading zeroes, so the length of the generated value will always match the format length. | RANDOM(X###) → A123 <br>RANDOM(\*\*\*\*) → 1AbC<br> <br>SEQUENTIAL(###) → 001<br> <br>SEQUENTIAL(######) → 000001 |

Algumas coisas importantes a serem observadas sobre os formatos:

  - Date format is very versatile, but be aware of which date or time
    components you are using. Using components smaller than a day (For
    example hours or seconds) is not recommended, even though available.

  - Text format allows for marking both the start and end of the input
    value, but "^..." and "..." will in reality give exactly the same
    results. The only time you would want to use "^" is when you want to
    enforce the length of the input value. For example, "^....$" will
    accept OSLO, since its 4 characters between the start and end, but
    PARIS will be rejected, since it has 5 characters.

  - When text format is used for unique values, like organisation unit
    code, make sure that the format does not break the uniqueness.
    (Example: ORG\_UNIT\_CODE(..) for "PARIS" and "PANAMA CITY" would
    both return PA, which means these two organisation units would in
    reality share generated values)

  - Generation format is the primary way to understanding the capacity
    of your pattern. Make sure the format is long enough to cover more
    values than you need.

To finish off the syntax section of the tutorial, here is a couple of
example
    TextPattern:

    ORG_UNIT_CODE (...) + "-" + CURRENT_DATE (aaaaww) + "-" + SEQUENCIAL (#####)

This pattern will have 99999 possible values (based on SEQUENTIAL. 00000
is never used since we start at 1). In addition, the remaining pattern
will change for each different organisation unit generating values
(ORG\_UNIT\_CODE) and for each week (CURRENT\_DATE(yyyyww) represents
year and week). That effectively means every new week, each organisation
unit will have 99999 new values they can use.

    "ABC_" + RANDOM (****)

The plain text segment of this pattern, will make no difference in the
total capacity of the pattern, however the generated segment (RANDOM)
will allow for 14776336 possible values. The reason for this is that \*
can be any one character of the 62 characters available (0-9, a-z, A-Z).
You can read more about understanding pattern capacity further down in
the tutorial.

### Projetando TextPattern para gerar ids { #designing-textpattern-for-generating-ids } 

One use-case for TextPattern is to generate unique ids. In this section
we will present guidelines and common issues related to designing
TextPatterns used for ids.

An id should never contain sensitive information, or information that in
combination can identify an individual. TextPattern does not currently
support segments that uses these kind of values, but might do so in the
future.

The following list highlights some of the TextPattern specific
restrictions you need to consider when designing a TextPattern for ids:

  - Make sure the capacity (number of possible values) of the
    TextPattern covers your use-case. It's better to have more values
    than needed than less. Tracked entity attributes using TextPattern
    will require that a single generated segment is present in the
    TextPattern.

  - A TextPattern is unique in the entire system, but only for the
    object using it. In other words, if you have a single tracked entity
    attribute with TextPattern, used by multiple Tracked entities (Not
    to be mistaken for tracked entity instances), all values generated
    will be shared between all traced entities using the attribute. This
    also means that if you have two tracked entity attributes with the
    same TextPattern syntax, each attribute will be able to generate the
    same value as the other, since uniqueness is based on the attribute.

<!-- end list -->

  - SEQUENTIAL segments are in the implementation numbers starting from
    1, increasing by 1 for each value, sequentially until no more values
    are available. However, in reality you will most likely end up with
    gaps when users generate and reserve values that is never used, or
    if a user sends in a value where the SEQUENTIAL segment has a higher
    value than recorded on the server.

  - The current implementation relies on the user-client to send in the
    values contained in the TextPattern when storing a new value. That
    means generating a correct id is depending on the user, and
    user-client, to provide the correct data.

### Compreendendo a capacidade do TextPattern { #understanding-textpattern-capacity } 

The most important thing to keep in mind when designing a TextPattern,
is the capacity - that means the total number of potential values a
TextPattern can yield.

With the current implementation of TextPattern, there are three main
factors that decides the capacity:

1.  Capacidade do segmento gerado no TextPattern

2.  The presence of a CURRENT\_DATE segment

3.  The presence of a ORG\_UNIT\_CODE segment

The presence of a date segment (like CURRENT\_DATE) will effectively
reset the capacity each time the segment changes. Depending on the date
format, it can change anywhere to yearly to daily. **Important: If your
date format don't contain a year, the pattern will resolve to the same
value every year.** That means values will already be used. For example,
if your TextPattern looks like this:

    CURRENT_DATE (ww) + "-" + RANDOM (#)

This pattern will give you up to 10 unique values for each week, but
after 1 year, CURRENT\_DATE(ww) will be the same as last year, and you
will have no new values available. If you use "yyyy-ww" instead, it will
be unique for every year, every week.

Organisation unit codes will make your values unique for each different
organisation unit, which means if you have a text pattern like this:

    ORG_UNIT_CODE () + "-" + RANDOM (#)

This pattern will give you 10 unique values for each different
organisation unit.

#### Calculando capacidade para segmentos gerados { #calculating-capacity-for-generated-segments } 

Understanding how to calculate the capacity of a TextPattern is critical
when designing TextPatterns. The generated segments will be the main
component of any TextPattern in terms of capacity, then increased based
on the presence of ORG\_UNIT\_CODE or CURRENT\_DATE.

Let's start with SEQUENTIAL segments. Each "\#" in the format represents
a number between 0 and 9. To calculate the total capacity, you multiply
the number of possible values for each "\#". Since it's always 10 (0-9)
the maths is quite straight forward:

    SEQUENCIAL (#) = 10 = 10
    SEQUENCIAL (###) = 10 * 10 * 10 = 1000
    SEQUENCIAL (#####) = 10 * 10 * 10 * 10 * 10 = 100.000

Since SEQUENTIAL counters on the server start at 1 and not 0, the actual
capacity is 999, but that's insignificant in most cases.

As soon as we involve RANDOM, the calculation becomes a bit more
complicated. Similar to SEQUENTIAL, a "\#" has 10 possible values, in
addition we have "X" and "x" with 26 possible values each, as well as
"\*" which can be any of the previous, which means 62 (10+26+26)
possible values.

To calculate the capacity, you need to take each character in your
format and replace with the number of possible values, then multiply
them all together like we did for SEQUENTIAL:

    RANDOM (#) = 10 = 10
    RANDOM (X) = 26 = 26
    RANDOM (*) = 62 = 62

    RANDOM (X ##) = 26 * 10 * 10 = 2600
    RANDOM (XXxx) = 26 * 26 * 26 * 26 = 456976

    RANDOM (***) = 62 * 62 * 62 = 238328

As you can see, the maths gets a bit more complicated when, but by
following this recipe you can see the number of potential values.

### Segmentos aleatórios e por que você deve evitá-los { #random-segments-and-why-you-should-avoid-it } 

There is a hidden cost of using the random segment in TextPattern in the
long run, but that does not mean you should never use it. This section
will highlight the problems of using the random segment and suggest when
it might be more appropriate to use it.

This section is motivated by an issue with the previous generation
strategy, where you only had random generation. After while, instances
using this feature would actually be unable to generate and reserve new
values, since it was taking to long to find available values. This
section looks at some of the problems with random generation that
created this situation.

#### Gerando valores aleatórios { #generating-random-values } 

Before using the RANDOM segment in your TextPattern, you should consider
the following problems connected to the use of RANDOM:

  - Generating values from a TextPattern with a RANDOM segment will be
    more complex than other TextPatterns

### Entrada de dados para metadados baseados em TextPattern { #data-entry-for-textpattern-based-metadata } 

As previously mentioned, the only metadata currently supporting
TextPattern is the tracked entity attributes. In this section, we will
describe the different ways data entry for TextPattern works, especially
for tracked entity attributes.

#### Validação de valores usando TextPattern { #validation-of-values-using-textpattern } 

By default, all values sent to the server for metadata using
TextPattern, will be validated. Validation can be skipped if needed, but
you should always validate input under normal circumstances. The
validation will be based on the TextPattern you have defined and will be
as strict as possible:

  - Date segments must match the same format as specified in the segment
    parameter

  - Os segmentos de texto simples devem corresponder exatamente

  - Text segments values must be at least as long as the format string.
    If both "^" and "$" is present, the value must match the exact
    length.

  - Generated segment values must match the format exactly, character by
    character.

When using the server to first generate and reserve values, the server
will modify the values used in the TextPattern before injecting them,
meaning you will always get a valid value when generating it on the
server.

A final exception to TextPattern validation is made for a special case:
If you change a TextPattern after reserving values for the original
pattern, values sent to the server that are invalid according to the new
TextPattern, will still be accepted if it was already reserved.

#### Fluxos de entrada de dados diferentes para TextPattern { #different-data-entry-flows-for-textpattern } 

There is currently 2 ways a client can store values for TextPattern
metadata:

1.  Gerando e reservando valores (os aplicativos devem fazer isso por você)

2.  Armazenar um valor personalizado

The preferred way, is to generate and reserve the needed values (The
number of values generated and reserved is handled by the app). That
means each time you are seeing and storing a value, it has been
generated and reserved by the server, and will be valid.

The other way might be useful in specific cases. The user will supply
the value themselves and as long as the value supplied is valid for the
TextPattern, they can put anything they want. The caveat of doing it
this way, is that you might use values that was reserved by someone else
and if you have a SEQUENTIAL segment, the counter will not be updated.



# DHIS2 Perguntas Freqüentes { #dhis2-frequently-asked-questions } 

**Q:** I have entered data into a data entry form, but I cannot see the
data in any reports (pivot tables, charts, maps). Why does data which is
entered not show up immediately in my graphs in DHIS2?

**A:** Data which is entered into DHIS2 must first be processed with the
"analytics". This means that data is not immediately available in the
analytics resources (such as reports, pivot tables, data visualizer,
GIS, etc.) after it has been entered. If scheduling is active, the
analytics process will run automatically at midnight each day. After
that, new data which was entered since the last time the analytics
process ran, will become visible.

You can trigger the analytics process manually by selecting
Reports-\>Analytics from the main menu and pressing the "Start export"
button. Note, the process may take a significant amount of time
depending on the amount of data in your database.

Outros fatores que podem afetar a visibilidade dos dados são:

  - Data approval: If data has not been approved to a level which
    corresponds to your users level, the data may not be visible to you.

  - Sharing of meta-data objects: If certain meta-data objects have not
    been shared with a user group which you are a member of, the data
    may not be visible to you.

  - Caching of analytics: In many cases, server administrators cache
    analytical objects (such as pivot tables, maps, graphs) on the
    server. If you have entered data, re-run analytics, and you are
    still not seeing any (updated) data, be sure that your data is not
    being cached by the server.

**Q:** I have downloaded DHIS2 from <https://www.dhis2.org/downloads>
but when i try to enter the system it needs a username and password.
Which should I use?

**A:** By default, the username will be "admin" and the password
"district". Usernames and passwords are case sensitive.



# Notas de lançamento e atualização { #release-and-upgrade-notes } 

Para obter informações atualizadas sobre os lançamentos mais recentes do DHIS 2, consulte a página [DHIS 2 downloads] (https://www.dhis2.org/downloads) em nosso site.



