---
revision_date: '2024-10-09'
tags:
- Usar
- DHIS core version 2.39
template: single.html
---

# O que é DHIS2? { #what_is_dhis2 } 

Depois de ler este capítulo, você será capaz de entender:

  - What is DHIS2 and what purpose it serves with respect to health
    information systems (HIS)?

  - What are the major technological considerations when it comes to
    deploying DHIS2, and what are the options are for extending DHIS2
    with new modules?

  - Qual é a diferença entre dados agregados e baseados em pacientes?

  - What are some of the benefits and challenges with using Free and
    Open Source Software (FOSS) for HIS?

## Fundo DHIS2 { #mod1_1 } 

DHIS2 is a tool for collection, validation, analysis, and presentation
of aggregate and patient-based statistical data, tailored (but not
limited) to integrated health information management activities. It is a
generic tool rather than a pre-configured database application, with an
open meta-data model and a flexible user interface that allows the user
to design the contents of a specific information system without the need
for programming. DHIS2 is a modular web-based software package built
with free and open source Java frameworks.

DHIS2 is open source software released under the BSD license and can be
obtained at no cost. It runs on any platform with a Java Runtime
Environment (JRE 7 or higher) installed.

DHIS2 is developed by the Health Information Systems Programme (HISP) as
an open and globally distributed process with developers currently in
India, Vietnam, Tanzania, Ireland, and Norway. The development is
coordinated by the University of Oslo with support from NORAD and other
donors.

The DHIS2 software is used in more than 40 countries in Africa, Asia,
and Latin America, and countries that have adopted DHIS2 as their
nation-wide HIS software include Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Rwanda, Ghana,
Liberia, and Bangladesh. A rapidly increasing number of countries and
organisations are starting up new deployments.

The documentation provided herewith, will attempt to provide a
comprehensive overview of the application. Given the abstract nature of
the application, this manual will not serve as a complete step-by-step
guide of how to use the application in each and every circumstance, but
rather will seek to provide illustrations and examples of how DHIS2 can
be implemented in a variety of situations through generalized examples.

Before implementing DHIS2 in a new setting, we highly recommend reading
the DHIS2 Implementation Guide (a separate manual from this one), also
available at the main DHIS2 [website](http://dhis2.org/documentation/).

## Principais recursos e finalidade do DHIS2 { #key-features-and-purpose-of-dhis2 } 

Os principais recursos e a finalidade do DHIS2 podem ser resumidos da seguinte forma:

  - Provide a comprehensive data management solution based on data
    warehousing principles and a modular structure which can easily be
    customised to the different requirements of a management information
    system, supporting analysis at different levels of the
    organisational hierarchy.

  - Customisation and local adaptation through the user interface. No
    programming required to start using DHIS2 in a new setting (country,
    region, district etc.).

  - Provide data entry tools which can either be in the form of standard
    lists or tables, or can be customised to replicate paper forms.

  - Provide different kinds of tools for data validation and improvement
    of data quality.

  - Provide easy to use - one-click reports with charts and tables for
    selected indicators or summary reports using the design of the data
    collection tools. Allow for integration with popular external report
    design tools (e.g. JasperReports) to add more custom or advanced
    reports.

  - Flexible and dynamic (on-the-fly) data analysis in the analytics
    modules (i.e. GIS, PivotTables,Data Visualizer, Event reports, etc).

  - A user-specific dashboard for quick access to the relevant
    monitoring and evaluation tools including indicator charts and links
    to favourite reports, maps and other key resources in the system.

  - Easy to use user-interfaces for metadata management e.g. for
    adding/editing datasets or health facilities. No programming needed
    to set up the system in a new setting.

  - Funcionalidade para projetar e modificar fórmulas de indicadores calculados.

  - User management module for passwords, security, and fine-grained
    access control (user roles).

  - Messages can be sent to system users for feedback and notifications.
    Messages can also be delivered to email and SMS.

  - Users can share and discuss their data in charts and reports using
    Interpretations, enabling an active information-driven user
    community.

  - Functionalities of export-import of data and metadata, supporting
    synchronisation of offline installations as well as interoperability
    with other applications.

  - Using the DHIS2 Web-API , allow for integration with external
    software and extension of the core platform through the use of
    custom apps.

  - Further modules can be developed and integrated as per user needs,
    either as part of the DHIS2 portal user interface or a more
    loosely-coupled external application interacting through the DHIS2
    Web-API.

In summary, DHIS2 provides a comprehensive HIS solution for the
reporting and analysis needs of health information users at any
level.

## Uso do DHIS2 em HIS: coleta, processamento, interpretação e análise de dados. { #use-of-dhis2-in-his-data-collection-processing-interpretation-and-analysis } 

The wider context of HIS can be comprehensively described through the
information cycle presented in Figure 1.1 below. The information cycle
pictorially depicts the different components, stages and processes
through which the data is collected, checked for quality, processed,
analysed and used.


![The health information
cycle](resources/images/dhis2UserManual/dhis2_information_cycle.png)

DHIS2 suporta as diferentes facetas do ciclo de informações, incluindo:

  - Coletando dados.

  - Execução de verificações de qualidade.

  - Acesso a dados em vários níveis.

  - Comunicando.

  - Fazer gráficos e mapas e outras formas de análise.

  - Enabling comparison across time (for example, previous months) and
    space (for example, across facilities and districts).

  - See trends (displaying data in time series to see their min and max
    levels).

As a first step, DHIS2 serves as a data collection, recording and
compilation tool, and all data (be it in numbers or text form) can be
entered into it. Data entry can be done in lists of data elements or in
customised user defined forms which can be developed to mimic paper
based forms in order to ease the process of data entry.

As a next step, DHIS2 can be used to increase data quality. First, at
the point of data entry, a check can be made to see if data falls within
acceptable range levels of minimum and maximum values for any particular
data element. Such checking, for example, can help to identify typing
errors at the time of data entry. Further, user can define various
validation rules, and DHIS2 can run the data through the validation
rules to identify violations. These types of checks help to ensure that
data entered into the system is of good quality from the start, and can
be improved by the people who are most familiar with it.

When data has been entered and verified, DHIS2 can help to make
different kinds of reports. The first kind are the routine reports that
can be predefined, so that all those reports that need to be routine
generated can be done on a click of a button. Further, DHIS2 can help in
the generation of analytical reports through comparisons of for example
indicators across facilities or over time. Graphs, maps, reports and
health profiles are among the outputs that DHIS2 can produce, and these
should routinely be produced, analysed, and acted upon by health
managers.

## Formação técnica { #technical-background } 

### DHIS2 como plataforma { #dhis2-as-a-platform } 

DHIS2 can be perceived as a platform on several levels. First, the
application database is designed ground-up with flexibility in mind.
Data structures such as data elements, organisation units, forms and
user roles can be defined completely freely through the application user
interface. This makes it possible for the system to be adapted to a
multitude of locale contexts and use-cases. We have seen that DHIS2
supports most major requirements for routine data capture and analysis
emerging in country implementations. It also makes it possible for DHIS2
to serve as management system for domains such as logistics, labs and
finance.

Second, due to the modular design of DHIS2 it can be extended with
additional software modules or through custom apps. These software
modules/apps can live side by side with the core modules of DHIS2 and
can be integrated into the DHIS2 portal and menu system. This is a
powerful feature as it makes it possible to extend the system with extra
functionality when needed, typically for country specific requirements
as earlier pointed out.

The downside of the software module extensibility is that it puts
several constraints on the development process. The developers creating
the extra functionality are limited to the DHIS2 technology in terms of
programming language and software frameworks, in addition to the
constraints put on the design of modules by the DHIS2 portal solution.
Also, these modules must be included in the DHIS2 software when the
software is built and deployed on the web server, not dynamically during
run-time.

In order to overcome these limitations and achieve a looser coupling
between the DHIS2 service layer and additional software artefacts, a
REST-based API has been developed as part of DHIS2. This Web API
complies with the rules of the REST architectural style. This implies
that:

  - The Web API provides a navigable and machine-readable interface to
    the complete DHIS2 data model. For instance, one can access the full
    list of data elements, then navigate using the provided URL to a
    particular data element of interest, then navigate using the
    provided URL to the list of data sets which the data element is a
    member of.

  - (Meta) Data is accessed through a uniform interface (URLs) using
    plain HTTP requests. There are no fancy transport formats or
    protocols involved - just the well-tested, well-understood HTTP
    protocol which is the main building block of the Web today. This
    implies that third-party developers can develop software using the
    DHIS2 data model and data without knowing the DHIS2 2specific
    technology or complying with the DHIS2 design constraints.

  - All data including meta-data, reports, maps and charts, known as
    resources in REST terminology, can be retrieved in most of the
    popular representation formats of the Web of today, such as XML,
    JSON, PDF and PNG. These formats are widely supported in
    applications and programming languages and gives third-party
    developers a wide range of implementation options.

### Entendendo a independência da plataforma { #understanding-platform-independence } 

All computers have an Operating System (OS) to manage it and the
programs running it. The operating system serves as the middle layer
between the software application, such as DHIS2, and the hardware, such
as the CPU and RAM. DHIS2 runs on the Java Virtual Machine, and can
therefore run on any operating system which supports Java. Platform
independence implies that the software application can run on ANY OS -
Windows, Linux, Macintosh etc. DHIS2 is platform independent and thus
can be used in many different contexts depending on the exact
requirements of the operating system to be used.

Additionally, and perhaps most importantly, since DHIS2 is a browser-based
application, the only real requirement to interact with the system is
with a web browser. DHIS2 supports most web browsers, although currently
either Google Chrome, Mozilla Firefox or Opera are recommended.

### DHIS2 server hosting { #dhis2-server-hosting } 

Hosting DHIS2 on a national scale is a considerable undertaking which requires planning, provisioning, monitoring and management of potentially complex hardware and/or cloud resources.  For a full discussion of the various tradeoffs of different approaches see the [server hosting](#server-hosting) section of the DHIS2 implementation guide.

## Diferença entre dados agregados e dados do paciente em um HIS { #difference-between-aggregated-and-patient-data-in-a-his } 

*Patient data* is data relating to a single patient, such as his/her
diagnosis, name, age, earlier medical history etc. This data is
typically based on a single patient-health care worker interaction. For
instance, when a patient visits a health care clinic, a variety of
details may be recorded, such as the patient's temperature, their
weight, and various blood tests. Should this patient be diagnosed as
having "Vitamin B 12 deficiency anaemia, unspecified" corresponding to
ICD-10 code D51.9, this particular interaction might eventually get
recorded as an instance of "Anaemia" in an aggregate based system.
Patient based data is important when you want to track longitudinally
the progress of a patient over time. For example, if we want to track
how a patient is adhering to and responding to the process of TB
treatment (typically taking place over 6-9 months), we would need
patient based data.

*Aggregated data* is the consolidation of data relating to multiple
patients, and therefore cannot be traced back to a specific patient.
They are merely counts, such as incidences of Malaria, TB, or other
diseases. Typically, the routine data that a health facility deals with
is this kind of aggregated statistics, and is used for the generation of
routine reports and indicators, and most importantly, strategic planning
within the health system. Aggregate data cannot provide the type of
detailed information which patient level data can, but is crucial for
planning and guidance of the performance of health systems.

In between the two you have case-based data, or anonymous "patient"
data. A lot of details can be collected about a specific health event
without necessarily having to identify the patient it involved.
Inpatient or outpatient visits, a new case of cholera, a maternal death
etc. are common use-cases where one would like to collect a lot more
detail that just adding to the total count of cases, or visits. This
data is often collected in line-listing type of forms, or in more
detailed audit forms. It is different from aggregate data in the sense
that it contains many details about a specific event, whereas the
aggregate data would count how many events of a certain type, e.g. how
many outpatient visits with principal diagnosis "Malaria", or how many
maternal deaths where the deceased did not attend ANC, or how many
cholera outbreaks for children under 5 years. In DHIS2 this data is
collected through programs of the type single event without
registration.

Patient data is highly confidential and therefore must be protected so
that no one other than doctors can get it. When in paper, it must be
properly stored in a secure place. For computers, patient data needs
secure systems with passwords, restrained access and audit logs.

Security concerns for aggregated data are not as crucial as for patient
data, as it is usually impossible to identify a particular person to a
aggregate statistic . However, data can still be misused and
misinterpreted by others, and should not be distributed without adequate
data dissemination policies in place.

## Software Livre e de Código Aberto (FOSS): benefícios e desafios { #free-and-open-source-software-foss-benefits-and-challenges } 

Software carries the instructions that tell a computer how to operate.
The human authored and human readable form of those instructions is
called source code. Before the computer can actually execute the
instructions, the source code must be translated into a machine readable
(binary) format, called the object code. All distributed software
includes the object code, but FOSS makes the source code available as
well.

Proprietary software owners license their copyrighted object code to a
user, which allows the user to run the program. FOSS programs, on the
other hand, license both the object and the source code, permitting the
user to run, modify and possibly redistribute the programs. With access
to the source code, the users have the freedom to run the program for
any purpose, redistribute, probe, adapt, learn from, customise the
software to suit their needs, and release improvements to the public for
the good of the community. Hence, some FOSS is also known as free
software, where “free” refers, first and foremost, to the above freedoms
rather than in the monetary sense of the word.

Within the public health sector, FOSS can potentially have a range of
benefits, including:

  - Lower costs as it does not involve paying for prohibitive license
    costs.

  - Given the information needs for the health sector are constantly
    changing and evolving, there is a need for the user to have the
    freedom to make the changes as per the user requirements. This is
    often limited in proprietary systems.

  - Access to source code to enable integration and interoperability. In
    the health sector interoperability between different software
    applications is becoming increasingly important, meaning enabling
    two or more systems to communicate metadata and data. This work is a
    lot easier, and sometimes dependent on the source code being
    available to the developers that create the integration. This
    availability is often not possible in the case of proprietary
    software. And when it is, it comes at a high cost and contractual
    obligations.

  - FOSS applications like DHIS2 typically are supported by a global
    network of developers, and thus have access to cutting edge research
    and development knowledge.



# Usando o aplicativo de entrada de dados { #data_entry_app } 

## Sobre o aplicativo de entrada de dados { #about_data_entry_app } 

The **Data Entry** app is where you manually enter aggregated data in
DHIS2. You register data for an organisation unit, a period, and a set
of data elements (data set) at a time. A data set often corresponds to a
paper-based data collection tool. You configure the data sets in the
**Maintenance** app.

> **Note**
> 
> If a data set has both a section form and a custom form, the system
> displays the custom form during data entry. Users who enter data can't
> select which form they want to use. In web-based data entry the order
> of display preference is:
> 
> 1.  Custom form (if it exists)
> 
> 2.  Section form (if it exists)
> 
> 3.  Default form
> 
> Mobile devices do not support custom forms. In mobile-based data entry
> the order of display preference is:
> 
> 1.  Section form (if it exists)
> 
> 2.  Default form

When you close an organisation unit, you can't register or edit data to
this organisation unit in the **Data Entry** app.

## Insira dados em um formulário de entrada de dados { #enter_data_in_data_entry_form } 

![](resources/images/data_entry/data_entry_overview.png)

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Data Entry **.

2.  In the organisation unit tree to the left, select an organisation
    unit.

3.  Selecione um ** Conjunto de dados **.

4.  Selecione um ** Período **.

    The available periods are controlled by the period type of the data
    set (reporting frequency). You can jump a year back or forward by
    clicking **Prev year** or **Next year**.

    > **Note**
    > 
    > Depending on how you've configured the data entry form, you might
    > have to enter additional information before you can open the date
    > entry form. This can for example be a project derived from a
    > category combination.

5.  Insira os dados no formulário de entrada de dados.

      - Um campo verde significa que o sistema salvou o valor.

      - A grey field means that the field is disabled and you can't
        enter a value. The cursor will automatically jump to the next
        open field.

      - To move to the next field, press the Tab key or the Down Arrow
        key.

      - To move back to the previous field, press Shift+Tab or the Up
        Arrow key.

      - If you type in an invalid value, for example a character in a
        field that only accepts numeric values, you'll get a pop-up that
        explains the problem and the field will be coloured yellow (not
        saved) until you have corrected the value.

      - If you have defined a minimum maximum value range for the field
        and you enter a value that is outside this range, you'll get a
        pop-up message that says the value is out of range. The value
        remains unsaved until you've changed the value or updated the
        value range and then re-entered the value.

6.  When you've filled in the form, click **Run validation** in the top
    right corner or below the data entry form.

    All validation rules which involves data elements in the current
    data entry form (data set) are then run against the new data. If
    there are no violations of the validation rules, you'll see a
    message saying *The data entry screen successfully passed
    validation*. If there are validation violations, they will be
    presented in a list.

    ![](resources/images/dhis2UserManual/Validation_Rule_Result.png)

7.  (Opcional) Corrija as violações de validação.

    > **Note**
    > 
    > Zero (0) will delete the value if the data element has been
    > configured to not store zeros.

8.  When you've corrected errors and you're done with data entry, click
    **Complete**.

    The system uses this information when generating completeness
    reports for district, county, province or the national level.

## Marque um valor de dados para acompanhamento { #mark_data_for_followup_in_data_entry_form } 

![](resources/images/data_entry/data_entry_section_history.png)

If you for example have a suspicious value that you need to investigate
further, you can keep it the system, but mark it for follow-up. In the
**Data Quality** app you can then run a follow-up analysis to view and
correct all marked values.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Data Entry **.

2.  Abra um formulário de entrada de dados existente.

3.  Double-click the field with the value you want to mark for
    follow-up.

4.  Clique no ícone de estrela.

## Edite os valores dos dados em um formulário de entrada de dados preenchido { #edit_data_value_in_completed_form } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Data Entry **.

2.  Abra um formulário de entrada de dados existente.

3.  Clique em ** Incompleto **.

4.  Altere os valores de dados relevantes.

    > **Note**
    > 
    > Zero (0) will delete the value if the data element has been
    > configured to not store zeros,

5.  Clique em ** Complete **.

## Exibir o histórico de um valor de dados { #display_data_value_history } 

![](resources/images/data_entry/data_entry_section_history.png)

Você pode exibir os últimos 12 valores registrados para um campo.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Data Entry **.

2.  Abra um formulário de entrada de dados existente.

3.  Double-click the field with the value you want to view the history
    for.

4.  Clique em ** Histórico do elemento de dados **.

## Exibir trilha de auditoria do valor dos dados { #display_data_value_audit_trail } 

![](resources/images/data_entry/data_entry_audit_trail.png)

The audit trail allows you to view other data values which have been
entered prior to the current value. The audit trail also shows when the
data value was altered and which user who made the changes.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Data Entry **.

2.  Abra um formulário de entrada de dados existente.

3.  Double-click the field with the value you want to view the audit
    trail for.

4.  Clique em ** Trilha de auditoria **.

## Crie o intervalo de valor máximo mínimo manualmente { #change_min_max_range_manually } 

![](resources/images/data_quality/set_min_max_manually.png)

1.  No aplicativo ** Data Entry **, abra um formulário de entrada de dados.

2.  Double-click the field for which you want to set the minimum maximum
    value range.

3.  Insira ** Limite mínimo ** e ** Limite máximo **.

4.  Clique em **Salvar**.

    If values don't fall within the new value range the next time you
    enter data, the data entry cell will appear with an orange
    background.

5.  (Optional) Type a comment to explain the reason for the discrepancy,
    for example an event at a facility which may have generated a large
    number of clients.

6.  (Opcional) Clique em ** Salvar comentário **.

> ** Dica **
>
> Clique no ícone de estrela para marcar o valor para acompanhamento posterior.

## Insira os dados offline { #enter_data_offline } 

The **Data Entry** app works even if you don't have a stable Internet
connection during data entry. When you don't have an internet
connection, the data you enter is saved to your local computer. When the
Internet connection is back, the app will push the data to the server.
The total bandwidth usage is reduced since data entry forms no longer
are retrieved from the server for each rendering.

> **Note**
> 
> To use this functionality, you must login to the server while you've
> an Internet connection.

  - When you're connected to the Internet, the app displays this message
    at the top of the data entry form:

    ![](resources/images/data_entry/data_entry_online1.png)

  - If your Internet connection breaks during data entry, the app
    detects it and displays this message:

    ![](resources/images/data_entry/data_entry_offline1.png)

    Now your data will be stored locally. You can continue to enter data
    as normal.

  - Once you have entered all necessary data and the app detects that
    the Internet connection is back, you'll see this message:

    ![](resources/images/data_entry/data_entry_offline_upload.png)

    Clique em ** Upload ** para sincronizar os dados com o servidor.

  - When the data has successfully synchronized with the server, you'll
    see this confirmation
    message:

    ![](resources/images/data_entry/data_entry_offline_upload_success1.png)

## Habilitar entrada de dados de unidades multiorganizacionais { #data_entry_multiple_organisation_units } 

![](resources/images/data_entry/data_entry_multiple_org_unit.png)

It can be useful to enter data for multiple organisation units in the
same data entry form, for instance if there are few data elements in the
form and a huge number of organisation units in the hierarchy. In that
case, you can enable multi-organisation unit data entry.

> ** Nota **
>
> A entrada de dados de unidades multi-organizacionais só funciona para formulários de seção.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Configurações do sistema **.

2.  Selecione ** Habilitar formulários de unidade de várias organizações **.

3.  In the **Data Entry** app, select the organisation unit immediately
    above the organisation unit you want to enter data for in the
    organisation unit hierarchy.

    Data elements will appear as columns and organisation units as rows
    in the form.

    > **Note**
    > 
    > The data entry forms should still be assigned to the facilities
    > that you actually enter data for, that is the organisation units
    > now appearing in the form.

## Veja também { #data_entry_app_see_also } 

  - [Control data quality](#control_data_quality)

  - [Manage data sets and data entry forms](#manage_data_set)

  - [Using the Maintenance app](#maintenance_app)


# Usando o aplicativo Capture { #capture_app } 

## Sobre o aplicativo Capture { #about_capture_app } 

In the Capture app you register events that occurred at a particular time and place. An event can happen at any given point in time. This stands in contrast to routine data, which is captured for predefined, regular intervals. Events are sometimes called cases or records. In DHIS2, events are linked to a program. The Capture app lets you select the organisation unit and program and specify a date when an event happened, before entering information for the event. Some events are linked to a tracked entity instance, for example a person, allowing longitudinal follow-up.

## Cadastre um evento { #capture_register_event } 

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.

2. Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3. Select an event program.

    You will only see programs associated with the selected organisation unit and programs you have access to, and that are shared with your user group through data level sharing.

4. Se o programa tiver uma combinação de categorias definida, a opção de categoria deverá ser selecionada.

5. Click **Create new event**.

    ![create new event](resources/images/create_new_event.png)

6. Preencha as informações necessárias. Se o estágio do programa de programas estiver configurado para capturar um local:

    - If the field is a coordinate field you can either enter the coordinates
    directly or you can click the **map** icon to the left of the coordinate field.
    The latter one will open a map where you can search for a location or set on
    directly by clicking on the map.

    - If the field is a polygon field you can click the **map** icon to the left of
    the field. This will open a map where you can search for a location and capture
    a polygon (button in the upper right corner of the map).

7. If desired, you can add a note by clicking the **Write note** button at the bottom of the form. Be aware that Event notes are attributed to a user and cannot be deleted. 

8. If desired you can add a relationship by clicking the **Add relationship** button at the bottom of the form.
   See the section about **Adding a relationship** for more information.

9. Clique em ** Salvar e sair ** ou clique na seta ao lado do botão para selecionar ** Salvar e adicionar outro **.

    - **Save and add another** will save the current event and clear the form.
    All the events that you have captured will be displayed in a list at the bottom of the page.
    When you want to finish capturing events you can, if the form is blank,
    click the finish button or if your form contains data click the arrow
    next to **Save and add another** and select **Save and exit**.

> **Note**
>
> Some data elements in an event might be mandatory (marked with a red star next to the data element label).
> All mandatory data elements must be filled in before the user is allowed to complete the event.
> The exception to this is if the user has the authority called __"Ignore validation of required fields in Tracker and Event Capture".__
> If the user has this authority, the mandatory data elements will not be required and
> the red star will not be displayed next to the data element label. Note that super user that have the __"ALL"__ authority automatically
> have this authority.

> **Tip**
>
> The data entry form can also be displayed in **row view**. In this mode the data elements are arranged horizontally. This can be
> achieved by clicking the **Switch to row view** button on the top right of the data entry form. If you are currently in **row view** you
> can switch to the default form view by clicking the **Switch to form view** button on the top right of the data entry form.

## Register a tracked entity instance { #register-a-tracked-entity-instance } 

There are two different ways one can register a tracked entity instance under an organisation unit.
The first way, is to register a tracked entity instance without enrolling it to a tracker program.
The second option, is to register a tracked entity instance with program and enroll it. 

### Without a program enrollment  { #without-a-program-enrollment } 

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.

2. Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3. Click **Create new**.

    ![image](resources/images/register-without-enrollment-new-button.png)

    You'll now be navigated to the registration page. In that page you will see a drop down 
    menu similar to the one in the image below. From the dropdown menu you can select a tracked entity 
    type, eg. Building, Person etc.

    ![image](resources/images/register-without-enrollment-dropdown-menu.png)

4. Select the tracked entity type which you want to create a new instance for.

    ![image](resources/images/register-without-enrollment-dropdown-menu-with-arrow.png)

5. The moment you select a tracked entity type, a form will be shown on the screen. 

    The "Profile" section will be shown. In this section you can add data relevant to the 
    tracked entity instance. The profile section mainly contains all the tracked entity attributes
    linked to the tracked entity type. 

    ![image](resources/images/register-without-enrollment-form.png)

6. Preencha as informações necessárias.

    If the tracked entity type is configured to capture a location:

    - If the field is a coordinate field you can either enter the coordinates
    directly or you can click the **map** icon to the left of the coordinate field.
    The latter one will open a map where you can search for a location or set on
    directly by clicking on the map.

    - If the field is a polygon field you can click the **map** icon to the left of
    the field. This will open a map where you can search for a location and capture
    a polygon (button in the upper right corner of the map).

7. Click the **Save person** button to register the tracked entity instance. 

8. You will now be prompted to the tracked entity instance dashboard. 

    The dashboard will show relevant information about the newly created tracked entity instance.

### With a program enrollment { #with-a-program-enrollment } 

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.

2. Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3. Select a tracker program of your choice.

4. Click **Create new person**. Note that the label of this button corresponds to the tracked entity type of the program, which could vary, such as "Building," "Person," etc.

    ![create new event](resources/images/register-and-enroll-program-selection.png)

5. Now, you will be able to see a form similar to the image below. 

    The enrollment form has different layouts depending on how the program is customized. The top section has the title "Enrollment",
    and it holds all the relevant information about the enrollment details. This section will always be present, regardless of layout.
    Underneath, the different data input fields relevant to the tracked entity instance will be displayed. 
    These fields will either be displayed within sections or as a completely custom form. 
    The sections, or custom form, mainly contains all the tracked entity attributes linked to the program or tracked entity type.

      ![create new event](resources/images/register-and-enroll-form.png)

6. Fill in the required information for the enrollment.
    If the tracked entity type is configured to capture a location:

    - If the field is a coordinate field you can either enter the coordinates
    directly or you can click the **map** icon to the left of the coordinate field.
    The latter one will open a map where you can search for a location or set on
    directly by clicking on the map.

    - If the field is a polygon field you can click the **map** icon to the left of
    the field. This will open a map where you can search for a location and capture
    a polygon (button in the upper right corner of the map).

7. Click **Save person** to register the tracked entity instance. 
    The **Save** button shows a loading spinner and the **Cancel** button is disabled while the request is processing.

8. You will now be prompted to the tracked entity instance dashboard. 

    The dashboard will show relevant information about the newly created tracked entity instance.

> **Note**
>
> Some data elements in an event might be mandatory (marked with a red star next to the data element label).
> All mandatory data elements must be filled in before the user is allowed to complete the event.
> The exception to this is if the user has the authority called __"Ignore validation of required fields in Tracker and Event Capture".__
> If the user has this authority, the mandatory data elements will not be required and
> the red star will not be displayed next to the data element label. Note that super user that have the __"ALL"__ authority automatically
> have this authority.

> **Tip**
>
> The data entry form can also be displayed in **row view**. In this mode the data elements are arranged horizontally. This can be
> achieved by clicking the **Switch to row view** button on the top right of the data entry form. If you are currently in **row view** you
> can switch to the default form view by clicking the **Switch to form view** button on the top right of the data entry form.

### Enrollment with auto generated events  { #enrollment-with-auto-generated-events } 

Events can automatically be created when enrolling in a program.

To automatically generate events, you can do the necessary configuration in the maintenance app.
1. Open the maintenance app

2. Select the Program tab
![](resources/images/auto-generated-01.png)

3. Select a Tracker program
![](resources/images/auto-generated-02.png)

4. Select the Program stages tab
![](resources/images/auto-generated-03.png)

5. Click on the program stage you would like to generate an event for
![](resources/images/auto-generated-04.png)

6. Select "Auto-generate event"
![](resources/images/auto-generated-05.png)

You can set multiple program stages within a program to be auto-generating (this will create an event for each program stage configured this way)

### Enrollment with open data entry form { #enrollment-with-open-data-entry-form } 

A program can be configured to automatically take the user to register a new event immediately after enrolling a tracked entity instance. To enable this behavior, the program must have at least one program stage with the "Open data entry form after registration" option checked. If more than one program stage has this option enabled, the first stage will be used.

To configure it, you must follow the steps described in the [Enrollment with auto generated events](#enrollment-with-auto-generated-events) section and then check the option "Open data entry form after enrollment".

### Enrollment with first stage on registration page { #enrollment-with-first-stage-on-registration-page } 

For tracker programs enable the "First stage appears on registration page" flag in the Maintenance. The enrollment registration page will now display the first program stage the user has access to.

![](resources/images/first-stage-during-registration.png)

#### Active type of event { #active-type-of-event } 

If the stage has the "Open data entry form after enrollment" selected, then the event will be generated into the ACTIVE status. Also its execution date will be calculated for the event, in addition to a due date.
The generation happens based on either the enrollment date or the incident date. You can choose the reporting date from the dropdown menu "Report date to use".
![](resources/images/auto-generated-06.png)

As shown in the image you have three options, a) Incident date b) Enrollment date or c) No value. 
Choosing reporting date as "Incident date" indicates that both the event execution date and due date will be the same as the incident date.
Choosing reporting date as either "Enrollment date" or "No value" indicates that both the event execution date and due date will be the same as the enrollment date.

#### Schedule type of event { #schedule-type-of-event } 

When the "Open data entry after enrollment" is not checked, it means that the event generated will be a SCHEDULE event. 
The scheduled event does not have an execution date, but only a due date. The due date for these future events are calculated based on either enrollment date or incident date. If the flag below is checked, the reference date is the enrollment date, if the flag is not checked, the incident date is used.
![](resources/images/auto-generated-07.png)

When there is no incident date, the reference date will fall back on the enrollment date regardless of whether the flag above is checked.

On SCHEDULE type of events the user can also configure the "Scheduled days from start". Which means if a stage has a number in "Scheduled days from start" the reference date will increased by that number. 
In the example below we increase the due date by 30 days.

![](resources/images/auto-generated-08.png)

When the "Scheduled days from start" does not contain a number or contains 0 the reference date is used without adding any days to it.


### Possible duplicates detection { #possible-duplicates-detection } 

In both cases of registering a tracked entity instance, (with enrollment or without enrollment) the system will start looking for possible duplicates.
Note that programs need to be correctly configured through the maintenance app for the system to start detecting duplicates when enrolling a new person in a program. 

To configure a program through the maintenance app you will have to: 


1. Open the maintenance app.
![](resources/images/duplicates-maintenance-config-00.png)

2. In the program section select your program. We select Child Programme for this example.
![](resources/images/duplicates-maintenance-config-01.png)

3. Select the Attributes tab.
![](resources/images/duplicates-maintenance-config-02.png)

4. Enable duplicates search by checking program attributes as searchable
![](resources/images/duplicates-maintenance-config-03.png)


The attributes you have selected as "Searchable" will be the ones which the system will use to detect possible duplicates against.  
Let us explain this with an example that demonstrates the detection of possible duplicates while enrolling a child in the Child Programme. 

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.
![](resources/images/duplicates-on-creation-00.png)

2. Select your organisation unit and program from the menu on the top.
![](resources/images/duplicates-on-creation-01.png)

3. Click **Create new person**
![](resources/images/duplicates-on-creation-02.png)

4. Fill in the first name in the form. **Remember, the first name we have checked as "Searchable" in the maintenance app.** 
Click **Save person**. The system will start looking for possible duplicates that match the name Sarah.
![](resources/images/duplicates-on-creation-03.png)

5. The system will automatically show a list of possible duplicates if there are any. 
![](resources/images/duplicates-on-creation-04.png)

6. You can choose to make a new enrollement by clicking **Save as new** or if you see the right person in the list - you can view the dashboard.
![](resources/images/duplicates-on-creation-05.png)

> **Tip**
>
> You can configure duplicates detection for tracked entity types the same way as we did for programs. 


### Program rules execution { #program-rules-execution } 

In both cases of registering a tracked entity instance (with enrollment or without enrollment), the system will run program rules you have configured.
Note that rules can be configured in the maintenance app.

To see a rule being executed while enrolling a tracked entity instance you will have to take the following steps. 

1. Configure a rule in the maintenance app. For the example below we configured a rule that throws a warning when the date of birth is less than a year.

2. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.
![](resources/images/duplicates-on-creation-00.png)

3. Select your organisation unit and program from the menu on the top.
![](resources/images/program-rules-on-creation-00.png)

4. Fill in the date of birth with a value which is less than a year. In our case this is 27th of January 2021. 
![](resources/images/program-rules-on-creation-01.png)

5. You will now be able to see the warning produced by the program rule underneath the birth date field. 
![](resources/images/program-rules-on-creation-02.png)

## Re-enroll an existing tracked entity instance { #re-enroll-an-existing-tracked-entity-instance } 

When you are on the re-enroll page, the teId will be visible in the URL parameters. The attributes of the tracked entity instance will be pre-fielded with the current values. 
![](resources/images/enroll-existing-tei.png)


## Adicionando um relacionamento { #capture_add_relationship } 

Relationships can be added either during registration, editing or viewing of an event.
Currently the **Capture App** only supports *Event to Tracked Entity Instance* relationships.

1. Durante um evento, clique em ** Adicionar relacionamento **.

2. Selecione o tipo de relacionamento que deseja criar.

You now have two options: 

- **Link to an existing Tracked Entity Instance** or 

- **Create new Tracked Entity Instance**.

![relationship options](resources/images/relationship_options.png)

### Link para uma instância de entidade rastreada existente { #link-to-an-existing-tracked-entity-instance } 

1. Clique em ** Link para uma Instância de Entidade Rastreada existente **.

- You will be presented with some options for searching for a **Tracked Entity Instance**.
  You have the option to select a **program**. If a **program** is selected the attributes are derived from the selected **program**.
  If no **program** is selected, only the attributes that belong to the **Tracked Entity Instance** will be visible.

    ![search for Tracked Entity Instance](resources/images/search_tei.png)

    - If the **Tracked Entity Instance** or **program** is configured with a unique attribute, this attribute can be
      used for finding a specific **Tracked Entity Instance** or **program**. This attribute should be presented alone.
      When the unique attribute field has been filled out, click the **Search** button located right below
      the unique attribute field.

    - If the **Tracked Entity Instance** or **program** has attibutes these can be used for searching by expanding the **Search by attributes** box.
      When all desired attribute fields have been filled out, click the **Search by attributes** button located at the bottom. You can also limit the search by setting the **Organisation unit scope**. If set to *All accessible* you will search for the **Tracked Entity Instance** in all organisation units you have access to. If you select *Selected*, you will be asked to select which organisation units to search within.

2. After a successful search you will be presented with a list of **Tracked Entity Instances** matching the search criteria.
   To create a relationship click the **Link** button on the **Tracked Entity Instance** you would like to create a relationship to.

- If you did not find the **Tracked Entity Instance** you were looking for, you can either click the **New search** or **Edit search** buttons.
  **New search** will take you to new blank search while **Edit search** will take you back to the search you just performed keeping the search criteria.

### Criar uma nova instância de entidade rastreada { #create-new-tracked-entity-instance } 

1. Clique em ** Criar nova instância de entidade rastreada **.

- You are now presented with a form for registering a new **Tracked Entity Instance**. You can choose to either register with or without a program.
  If a program is selected, the new **Tracked Entity Instance** will be enrolled in said program. You can also change the **Organisation unit** by removing the one that is automatically set and selecting a new one.

  ![register new Tracked Entity Instance](resources/images/register_tei.png)

2. Preencha os atributos desejados (e possivelmente obrigatórios) e os detalhes de inscrição.

3. Clique em ** Criar instância de entidade rastreada e link **.

> **Note**
>
> When filling in data you might face a warning telling you that a possible duplicate has been found. You can click the warning to see these
> duplicates and if the duplicate is a match you can choose to link that **Tracked Entity Instance** by clicking the **Link** button.
> If the warning is still present when you are done filling in data, you will not see the **Create Tracked Entity Instance and Link** button.
> Instead you will be presented with a button called **Review duplicates**. When you click this button a list of possible duplicates will be displayed.
> If any of these duplicates matches the **Tracked Entity Instance** you are trying to create you can click the **Link** button, if not you can click
> the **Save as new person** button to register a new **Tracked Entity Instance**.


## Editar um evento { #capture_edit_event } 

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.

2. Selecione um programa.

3. Select an organisation unit or click the _all events_-link to view all events accessible to you.

    ![](resources/images/main-page-all-accessible-records.png)
   Todos os eventos registrados no programa selecionado aparecem em uma lista.

4. Clique no evento que você deseja modificar.

5. Clique no botão ** Editar evento **.

6. Modifique os detalhes do evento e clique em ** Salvar **.

## Excluir um evento { #capture_delete_event } 

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.

2. Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3. Selecione um programa.

   Todos os eventos registrados no programa selecionado aparecem em uma lista.

4. Clique no ícone ** ponto triplo ** no evento que deseja excluir.

5. No menu exibido, clique em ** Excluir evento **.

    ![delete event](resources/images/delete_event.png)

## Modificar um layout de lista de eventos { #capture_modify_event_list_layout } 

You can select which columns to show or hide in an event list. This can
be useful for example when you have a long list of data elements
assigned to a program stage.

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.

2. Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3. Selecione um programa.

   Todos os eventos registrados no programa selecionado aparecem em uma lista.

4. Clique no ícone de ** engrenagem ** no canto superior direito da lista de eventos.

5. Selecione as colunas que você deseja exibir e clique em ** Salvar **.

    ![modify event list](resources/images/modify_event_list.png)

> **Tip**
>
> You can reorganize the order of the data elements by draging and dropping them in the list.

## Filtrar uma lista de eventos { #capture_filter_event_list } 

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.

2. Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3. Selecione um programa.

   Todos os eventos registrados no programa selecionado aparecem em uma lista.

    Along the top of the event list are buttons with the same names as the column headers in the list.

4. Use os botões na parte superior da lista para filtrar com base em uma data de relatório ou um elemento de dados específico.

    ![filter event](resources/images/filter_event.png)

> **Note**
>
> Different data element types are fitered in different ways. A **Number** data element will for instance show a rang to filter on while a **Text** data element will ask you to enter a search query to filter on.

## Classifique uma lista de eventos { #capture_sort_event_list } 

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.

2. Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3. Selecione um programa.
   Todos os eventos registrados no programa selecionado aparecem em uma lista.

4. Clique em um dos cabeçalhos de coluna para classificar a lista nesse elemento de dados em ordem crescente.

   Uma pequena seta para cima é exibida ao lado da coluna para mostrar que a lista está classificada em ordem crescente.

5. Clique no cabeçalho da coluna novamente para classificar a lista nesse elemento de dados em ordem decrescente.

   Uma pequena seta para baixo é exibida ao lado da coluna para mostrar que a lista está classificada em ordem decrescente.

    ![sort event](resources/images/sort_event.png)

## Baixe uma lista de eventos { #capture_download_event_list } 

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.

2. Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3. Selecione um programa.
   Todos os eventos registrados no programa selecionado aparecem em uma lista.

4. Click the **three dots** icon on the top right of the event list.

5. Click **Download data**.

6. Selecione o formato que deseja baixar.

    ![download event list](resources/images/download_event_list.png)

> **Note**
>
> You can download an event list in JSON or CSV formats.

## Visualizações de lista predefinidas { #capture_views } 

Você pode configurar suas próprias visualizações e salvá-las para uso posterior. As visualizações também podem ser compartilhadas com outras pessoas. Uma visualização consiste em filtros, ordem de coluna e ordem de classificação de evento.

### Salvando uma nova visualização { #capture_view_save } 

1. Selecione uma unidade organizacional e um programa.

2. Defina os filtros usando os botões de filtro acima da lista de eventos (descritos em detalhes [aqui] (# capture_filter_event_list)).

    ![](resources/images/view_save_filters.png)

3. Set the column order by clicking the cog icon and then, in the pop-up, specify the layout according to your preference (how to modify the layout is described in detail [here](#capture_modify_event_list_layout)).

    ![](resources/images/view_save_column_order.png)

4. Classifique os eventos clicando em um dos cabeçalhos das colunas (descrito em detalhes [aqui] (# capture_sort_event_list)).

    ![](resources/images/view_save_sort_order.png)

5. Abra o menu mais (ícone de três pontos) à direita e selecione "Salvar visualização atual ..."

    ![](resources/images/view_save_menu.png)

6. Preencha um nome para a visualização e clique em salvar.

    ![](resources/images/view_save_name.png)

### Carregando uma visualização { #capture_view_load } 

1. Selecione uma unidade organizacional e um programa com uma visão predefinida.

2. As visualizações devem estar disponíveis acima da própria lista de eventos. Clique em uma visualização para carregá-la.

    ![](resources/images/view_load_unselected.png)

3. Um exemplo de visualização carregada.

    ![](resources/images/view_load_selected.png)

### Atualizando uma vista { #capture_view_update } 

1. Carregue a visão que você gostaria de atualizar (veja [carregando uma visão] (# capture_view_load)).

2. Faça suas alterações nos filtros, ordem das colunas e / ou ordem de classificação do evento.

    > **Note**
    >
    > An asterisk(*) is appended to the view name when the view has unsaved changes.

3. Abra o menu mais (ícone de três pontos) à direita e selecione "Atualizar visualização".

    ![](resources/images/view_update.png)

### Compartilhando uma visão { #capture_view_share } 

1. Carregue a visão que você gostaria de compartilhar (veja [carregando uma visão] (# capture_view_load)).

2. Abra o menu mais (ícone de três pontos) à direita e selecione "Compartilhar visualização ..."

    ![](resources/images/view_share.png)

3. Faça suas alterações. Você normalmente adicionaria usuários / grupos (1) e / ou alteraria os direitos de acesso de usuários / grupos adicionados anteriormente (2).

    ![](resources/images/view_share_access.png)

### Excluindo uma vista { #capture_view_delete } 

1. Carregue a visualização que você gostaria de excluir (consulte [carregando uma visualização] (# capture_view_load)).

2. Abra o menu mais (ícone de três pontos) à direita e selecione "Excluir visualização".

    ![](resources/images/view_delete.png)

## User assignment in events programs { #capture_user_assignment } 

Os eventos podem ser atribuídos aos usuários. Este recurso deve ser ativado por programa.

### Assigning user to new events { #capture_user_assignment_new } 

1. Selecione uma unidade de organização e um programa com atribuição de usuário habilitada.

2. Clique em ** Novo Evento ** no canto superior direito.

3. Você encontrará a seção responsável perto da parte inferior da página de entrada de dados. Pesquise e selecione o usuário ao qual deseja atribuir o evento. O responsável será preservado quando você salvar o evento.

    ![](resources/images/user_assignment_new.png)

    ![](resources/images/user_assignment_new_filled.png)

### Alterar cessionário { #capture_user_assignment_edit } 

1. Selecione uma unidade de organização e um programa com atribuição de usuário habilitada.

2. Clique em um evento da lista

3. Na coluna certa, você encontrará a seção do responsável.

    ![](resources/images/user_assignment_edit.png)

4. Click the **Edit** button, or the **Assign** button if the event is not currently assigned to anyone.

    ![](resources/images/user_assignment_edit_button.png)

    ![](resources/images/user_assignment_edit_add.png)

5. Search for and select the user you would like to reassign the event to. Click the **Save** button.

### Assignee in the event list { #assignee-in-the-event-list } 

Na lista de eventos, você poderá ver o responsável por evento. Além disso, você pode classificar e filtrar a lista pelo responsável.

#### Filtrar por cessionário { #filter-by-assignee } 

1. Clique no filtro ** Atribuído a **.

    ![](resources/images/user_assignment_event_list.png)

2. Selecione o filtro de cessionário de sua preferência e clique em atualizar.

    ![](resources/images/user_assignment_event_list_options.png)

## Programas rastreadores { #capture_tracker_programs } 

The Capture app supports the workinglists in tracker programs, but when you open a tracked entity instance, you will be redirected to the enrollment dashboard in the Tracker Capture app.

![](resources/images/tracker_program.png)


## Search for tracked entity instances { #search-for-tracked-entity-instances } 

### In Program scope { #in-program-scope } 

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.

2. Selecione um programa.

    You will only see programs associated with the selected organisation unit and programs you have access to, and that are shared with your user group through data level sharing.

3. Click the Search button.

4. From the dropdown menu click the first option.

    ![](resources/images/search-by-attributes-find-button.png)

    These steps will take you to the search page. There, based on the configuration of your organisation, will see the different attributes you can search with. An example of how this looks is the following.

    ![](resources/images/search-by-attributes-on-scope-program-overview-0.png)

    To execute a search now:

1. Fill in the attributes you want to search with.

2. Click the **Search by attributes** button.

    ![](resources/images/search-by-attributes-on-scope-program-overview-1.png)

3. The results of the search will be displayed as follows.

    ![](resources/images/search-by-attributes-on-scope-program-overview-2.png)

    In this list you can see the entries that match your search. For each entry you can have a total of three options.

    a. You can choose to view the dashboard for the **Tracked Entity Instance** by clicking the "View dashboard" button

    ![](resources/images/search-by-attributes-on-scope-program-overview-5.png)

    b. You can view the the active enrollment of a **Tracked Entity Instance** by clicking the "View active enrollment" button

    ![](resources/images/search-by-attributes-on-scope-program-overview-3.png)

    c. You can re-enroll a **Tracked Entity Instance** to the current program you are searching within.

    ![](resources/images/search-by-attributes-on-scope-program-overview-4.png)


#### Fallback search { #fallback-search } 

Execute a full search as described above. If the search you have made has results they will be displayed. However, the actual **Tracked Entity Instance** you are searching for may be within a different program. In that case, you may want to extend the search to other programs. This is known as a fallback search.

To execute a fallback search, simply press the button on the bottom saying "Search in all programs".
You will see the **Results in all programs** be appended below the search in the current program. These two modules are collapsible to save space. 

If the fallback can not be done, you will be presented with a modal to go **Back to search** so that you can change the search terms.

> **Note**
>
> The fallback search is only possible when searching within a Program.

![](resources/images/search-by-attributes-fallback-overview-0.png)

#### Create new **Tracked entity instance** { #create-new-tracked-entity-instance } 

When none of the results match, you can create a new user by clicking **Create new** button on the bottom of the search page. 

Based on the search domain, you will be navigated to the registration of the selected **Tracked entity type**, with or without program enrollment preselected. 
The search terms that you typed in before will be prefilled in the registration form.

![](resources/images/search-page-create-new-tei.png)


### In Tracked entity type scope { #in-tracked-entity-type-scope } 

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.

2. Click the **Search** button to open the search page.

3. Click on the drop down menu and select the type of entity you want to search for.

    ![](resources/images/search-by-attributes-domain-selector-overview-0.png)

4. Make a selection from the list.

    ![](resources/images/search-by-attributes-domain-selector-overview-1.png)

    Based on the configuration of your organisation you will see the different attributes you can search with. An example of how this looks is the following.

    ![](resources/images/search-by-attributes-on-scope-tetype-overview-0.png)

    To execute a search now:

1. Fill in the attributes you want to search with.

2. Click the Search by attributes button.

    ![](resources/images/search-by-attributes-on-scope-tetype-overview-1.png)

3. The results of the search will be displayed as follows.

    ![](resources/images/search-by-attributes-on-scope-tetype-overview-2.png)

    In this list you can see the entries that match your search. For each entry you have the option to click the "View Dashboard" button to view the dashboard for the **Tracked Entity Instance**.


### Too many results functionality { #too-many-results-functionality } 

The program or tracked entitiy type you are searching within may be configured with a limit on the number of results that are retrurned from a search. If your search results exceed this limit you will be shown a warning message like the one below.

![](resources/images/search-by-attributes-on-scope-program-overview-too-many-results-message.png)

### Pagination { #pagination } 

The results page shows up to five results at a time. You should try to use specific search criteria so that there are not too many matches. However, if there are more than five results, you can see the next results by using the **>** button at the end of the page.

![](resources/images/search-by-attributes-on-scope-program-overview-pagination.png)

## List tracked entity instances enrolled in program { #list-tracked-entity-instances-enrolled-in-program } 

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.

2. Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3. Select a tracker program with "Display front page list" set to true.

4. The program can have categories associated with it (implementing partner would be an example of such a category). If this is the case, fill them in.

### Custom TEI working list for programs with "Display front page list" set to false. { #custom-tei-working-list-for-programs-with-display-front-page-list-set-to-false } 

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.

2. Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3. Select a tracker program with "Display front page list" set to false.

4. If the program has any custom working list you are able to click and load it.

![](resources/images/tei_list.png)

### Filter the list { #filter-the-list } 

Use the buttons above the list itself to filter it.

![](resources/images/tei_list_filters.png)

As an example, you could filter the list to show only tracked entity instances where you have been assigned an event: Click the "Assigned to" filter (1), select "Me" (2) and then "Apply" the changes (3).

![](resources/images/tei_list_filter_example.png)

### Sort the list { #sort-the-list } 

Click one of the column headers to sort the list by that column. A small arrow is displayed next to the column header to indicate the current sort order. Click again to change between ascending and descending order.

![](resources/images/tei_list_sort_order.png)

### Modify the list layout { #modify-the-list-layout } 

You can select which columns to show in the list and also reorganize the order of the columns.

Click the **gear** icon in the top right corner of the list. Tick the checkboxes for the the columns you would like to display (1) and reorgainze the columns by dragging and dropping (2).

![](resources/images/tei_list_column_layout.png)

### Loading a predefined list view { #loading-a-predefined-list-view } 

You will find the predefined list views above the filters for the list. Click to load a view. 

![](resources/images/tei_list_predefined_views.png)

### Download the tracked entities list { #download-the-tracked-entities-list } 

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Capture **.
2. Selecione uma unidade organizacional.
3. Select a tracker program with "Display front page list" set to true.
4. Click the **three dots** icon on the top right of the tracked entities list.
5. Click **Download data**.
6. Selecione o formato que deseja baixar.
    ![download tracked entities list](resources/images/download_tracked_entities_list.png)
> **Note**
> You can download the tracked entities list in JSON or CSV formats.

## Tracker program stage working list { #tracker-program-stage-working-list } 

You can show data elements from a single stage in a working list. Select the "Program stage" option from the "More filters" dropdown, then choose a program stage.

![](resources/images/program_stage_button.png)

![](resources/images/program_stage_working_list.png)

The tracker program stage list can be [filtered](#filter-the-list), [sorted](#sort-the-list), [modified](#modify-the-list-layout), [saved](#capture_view_save), [updated](#capture_view_update), [deleted](#capture_view_delete) and [shared](#capture_view_share) in the same way as other working lists. Additionally, the program stage list can be [filtered by assignee](#assignee-in-the-event-list), just like an event program list.

## Implementer / administrator info { #implementer_info } 

### Metadata caching { #metadata_caching } 

For performance reasons the Capture app caches metadata in the client browser. When metadata is updated on the server the changes needs to be propagated to the clients that have already cached the metadata. Depending on the change, this is done in one of three ways:

1. If the change is bound to a program you will need to increase the program version for that particular program. For example, if you change the data elements in a program or a program rule, the version for the bound program needs be increased.

2. If the change is NOT bound to a program you will need to increase ANY program version for the change to be propagated to the clients. Examples here are changes to constants, organisation unit levels or organisation unit groups.

3. The exception to the two rules above is option sets. Option sets have their own version property, i.e. increasing the option set version should ensure the option set metadata are propagated to the clients.


## Enrollment dashboard { #enrollment-dashboard } 

### Enabling the enrollment dashboard { #enabling-the-enrollment-dashboard } 

#### Opt in { #opt-in } 

Enable the enrollment dashboard for a Tracker program for all the users. The dialog is visible for users with program write access. 

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-opt-in.png)

#### Opt out { #opt-out } 

Disable the enrollment dashboard for a Tracker program for all the users.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-opt-out.png)

### Reaching the enrollment dashboard via url { #reaching-the-enrollment-dashboard-via-url } 

You reach the enrollment dashboard either by typing in the address bar of your browser or using the user interface of the capture app.
In this section we are focusing on the first use-case, where you type or paste the url you want to access in the Address bar.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-01.png)

One way to reach the enrollment dashboard and view a specific tracked entity instance's enrollment is by using _only_ the enrollment id. For example the link .../dhis-web-capture/#/enrollment?enrollmentId=wBU0RAsYjKE will 
take you the dashboard for the enrollment with id `wBU0RAsYjKE`. 

The top of the dashboard defines your context. For example in the image below the context is as follows, the selected program is "Child Programme", the organisation unit is "Ngelehun CHC", the selected person is "Anna Jones" and the selected enrollment is "2017-11-16 11:38".

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-02.png)

You can change your context by clicking the "x" button.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-03.png)

#### Deselecting the program { #deselecting-the-program } 

When you deselect the program you see the following

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-05.png)

##### Selecting a program with enrollments { #selecting-a-program-with-enrollments } 

When program _and_ enrollment selections are empty, you first have to select a program. 
If the tracked entity instance (in this case "Anna Jones") has enrollments under the program you select you will see the following message.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-09.png)

##### Selecting a program with zero enrollments { #selecting-a-program-with-zero-enrollments } 

If the tracked entity instance (in this case "Anna Jenkins") does not have enrollments under the program you select you will see a message explaining that there are no enrollments for that program.
You will also be given the option to enroll "Anna Jenkins" in that program.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-10.png)

##### Selecting an event program  { #selecting-an-event-program } 

When you select an event program you will see the following. (Remember event programs do not have enrollments in the system, only tracker programs do).

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-11.png)

You will also be given the option to either create a new event for the selected program or view the working lists for the selected program.

##### Selecting a program with a different tracked entity type  { #selecting-a-program-with-a-different-tracked-entity-type } 

When your selected tracked entity type is a person, as in our example with Anna Jenkins, and you select a program that is not of type person but for example of a type Malaria case you will see the following.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-12.png)

You are also given the option to enroll a tracked entity instance in the program you selected.

#### Deselecting the organisation unit { #deselecting-the-organisation-unit } 

When you deselect the organisation unit you see the following

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-06.png)

#### Deselecting the tracked entity instance { #deselecting-the-tracked-entity-instance } 

When you deselect the tracked entity instance, in this case "Anna Jones" you are taken to the working lists in that Tracker program.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-07.png)

#### Deselecting the enrollment { #deselecting-the-enrollment } 

When you deselect the enrollment you see the following

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-08.png)


###Quick actions { #quick-actions } 

The quick actions widget offers shortcuts for frequently used actions for the current enrollment.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dashboard-quick-actions.png)

### Program stage list { #program-stage-list } 

Stages can be collapsed or expanded to reveal the events inside.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-stages-events-02.png)

#### Collapsed stages { #collapsed-stages } 

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-stages-events-01.png)

In the collapsed state, you can view the summary information about this stage including: 
- Ícone
- Program stage name
- Program stage description (on hovering the information icon)
- Total number of events
- Last updated date 
Depending on the status of events, there can be additional information regarding: total number of overdue events or total number of scheduled events.

#### Expanded stages { #expanded-stages } 

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-stages-events-03.png)

When you expand the list, you will see the table contains the data of events in the stage. This includes mandatory columns: `Status`, `Report date` and `Organization unit`, the following columns depend on the data elements that have been selected as `Display in list`  of event.

Events are sorted with most recent on top and other columns are also sortable.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-stages-events-04.png)

When clicking  **New {stage event name}** button, you will be redirected to the  **Add new event page** for this selected stage.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-stages-events-06.png)


When clicking  **Go to full {stage event name}** button, you will be redirected to the  **Program stage list page** for this selected stage.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-stages-events-08.png)

#### Expanded stages with more than 5 events  { #expanded-stages-with-more-than-5-events } 

In case there are more than 5 events in the list, only the first 5 are shown. You will be able to view the rest by clicking  **Show more**.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-stages-events-05.png)

If you want to collapse events, you can use  **Reset list** button which will return the table back to the default sorting and initial 5 events.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-stages-events-07.png)

### Enrollment widget { #enrollment-widget } 

On the enrollment page you can see the enrollment widget

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-enrollment-widget-1.png)

#### Enrollment actions { #enrollment-actions } 

When you click on the enrollment actions button, a menu with all the available actions will open. You can:

- Change the enrollment status to Active, Canceled or Completed using the buttons in the menu.
- Mark or remove the enrollment for a follow-up.
- Transfer the enrollment to another organisation unit
- Delete the enrollment
- Add coordinates to the enrollment

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-enrollment-widget-2.png)

There can only be one active enrollment at a time. If there are no active enrollments, there will be a button **Add new** to enroll the tracked entity instance in the program again.
If the program only allows one enrollment per tracked entity instance, the **Add new** button will be disabled with a tooltip saying `Only one enrollment per {TET} is allowed in this program`.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-enrollment-widget-add-new.png)

#### Transfer the enrollment to another organisation unit { #transfer-the-enrollment-to-another-organisation-unit } 

In the enrollment actions, you could also choose to transfer the enrollment to another organisation unit. Click the transfer button and select the organisation unit you want to transfer the enrollment to.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-enrollment-widget-transfer.png)

#### Delete the enrollment { #delete-the-enrollment } 

You can delete the enrollment by clicking the delete button and confirming the action in the modal. 

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-enrollment-widget-3.png)

#### Complete the enrollment { #complete-the-enrollment } 

You can complete the enrollment by clicking the complete button. When there are active events, you can choose to complete the enrollment along with the events from the confirmation modal.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-enrollment-widget-4.png)

### Enrollment note widget { #enrollment-note-widget } 

The enrollment note widget displays notes and allows addition of notes, associated with the current enrollment. 

![](resources/images/enrollment-widget-note.png)

By clicking in the text field, you will be able to enter new text and see action buttons **Save note** and **Cancel**. Be aware that Enrollment notes are attributed to a user and cannot be deleted. 


### Relationship widget { #relationship-widget } 

The Relationships widget on the enrollment dashboard is used for viewing the record’s linked relationships to other records.
The number next to the title signifies the total number of relationships

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-relationship-widget.png)

For tracked entity instance relationships, the key attributes shown in the widget are the attributes that have been selected to be displayed on the relationship type page in Maintenance.

If no attributes are selected, it will just show a row per record with tracked entity type name and relationship creation date.

When clicking a tracked entity instance you should be taken to the Enrollment Dashboard. If the relationship type includes a program, you should be taken to the latest enrollment for that program. If no program is specified, you should still be sent to the enrollment dashboard, but without a program.

Click the **Add new** button to add a new relationship. Adding a new relationship opens a dialog where you can select the applicable relationship type.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-relationship-widget-add.png)

Choose between linking to an existing tracked entity instance or creating a new one.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-relationship-widget-add-choose.png)

#### Existing tracked entity instance { #existing-tracked-entity-instance } 

Use the search form to find any existing record to link to.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-relationship-widget-add-existing.png)

#### New tracked entity instance { #new-tracked-entity-instance } 

Use the form to create a new record and link.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-relationship-widget-add-new.png)

### Tracked entity instance profile widget { #tracked-entity-instance-profile-widget } 

On the enrollment dashboard, you can view the tracked entity instance profile widget. Inside the profile widget you can view the key attributes values. 

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-tei-profile-widget.png)

Click the **Edit** button to make changes to the tracked entity instance profile. Editing the profile opens a dialog where the profile attributes can be changed.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-tei-profile-widget-edit.png)

Click the **Delete ${tracked entity type}** button to delete the tracked entity. You can confirm the action from the dialog. Once confirmed, tracked entity and all its associated enrollment and events across all programs will be deleted. To delete a tracked entity that has any enrollments, the user needs the authority **Delete tracked entity instance and associated enrollments and events**.

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-tei-profile-widget-delete.png)

### Feedback widget { #feedback-widget } 

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-feedback-widget-1.png)

On the enrollment dashboard, the feedback widget displays text and values that are triggered by certain conditions. 
If the current dashboard triggers some rules set up in the program, the text or values will be automatically displayed.

#### Empty state { #empty-state } 

If there isn't any feedback for the current dashboard, the widget shows a short _empty_ message.
If there aren't any program rules that could show feedback for the current dashboard then the widget is hidden.


### Indicator widget { #indicator-widget } 

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-indicator-widget-1.png)

On the enrollment dashboard, the indicator widget displays indicator text and values output related to the current dashboard.
The indicators will be sorted alphabetically.

#### Empty state { #empty-state } 

If there aren't any related indicators or indicator output for the current dashboard, the widget shows a short _empty_ message.
If the current dashboard can't show any indicator output (because it has no related indicators) then the widget is hidden.

#### Legends { #legends } 

Some indicator values show a colored circle next to the value. 
The colored circle shows the related legend color for that indicator value. 
Colored legend circles are only shown for indicator values that have them set up.


### Warning widget { #warning-widget } 

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-warning-widget-1.png)

On the enrollment dashboard, the warning widget displays warnings related to the current dashboard. The widget shows warnings that are not associated with any specific data item.
If there aren't any warnings to show for the current dashboard then the widget is hidden.

### Error Widget { #error-widget } 

![](resources/images/enrollment-dash-error-widget-1.png)

On the enrollment dashboard, the errors widget displays errors related to the current dashboard. The widget shows errors that are not associated with any specific data item.
If there aren't any errors to show for the current dashboard then the widget is hidden.

## Enrollment event view and edit page { #enrollment-event-view-and-edit-page } 

### Navigation  { #navigation } 

You can reach the enrollment event edit page is by clicking any event in the Program stage list from the Enrollment Overview page.

### Top bar context  { #top-bar-context } 

At the top of the page you can see various information related to the current context. You can see the program, the organization unit, the tracked entity, the enrollment date, the stage and the enrollment event date.

To go to Enrollment Overview page you can:
- click the "Back to all stages and events" button.
- deselect the stage from the top bar.
- deselect the event from the top bar.

![](resources/images/enrollment-event-view-edit-navigation.png)

### View/Edit event form  { #viewedit-event-form } 

This is the form where you can see and edit the enrollment event details.

#### Form header  { #form-header } 

In the view/edit event form you can see the stage name and icon.

![](resources/images/enrollment-event-view-edit-header.png)

### Top bar context   { #top-bar-context } 

At the top of the page you can see different informations related with the current context. You can see the program, the organization unit, the tracked entity, the enrollment date, the stage. 

To go to Enrollment Overview page you can: 
- deselect the stage from the top bar. 
- deselect the event from the top bar. 

![](resources/images/enrollment-event-new-navigation.png) 


### Scheduled date in edit event form { #scheduled-date-in-edit-event-form } 
If an event has the status Scheduled or Overdue, you will be able to see the **Report** and **Schedule** tab. 

![](resources/images/enrollment-edit-event-schedule-date-1.png)


In the **Report** tab, the scheduled date field will still be shown, but will be greyed out, and there will be an icon next to it with a tooltip saying “Go to **Schedule** tab to reschedule this event”.

In the **Schedule** tab, the similar information about scheduling an event as in New event workspace will be shown. You will be able to edit the schedule date and save the change by clicking **Schedule** button.

![](resources/images/enrollment-edit-event-schedule-date.png)

If an active event has a scheduled date before becoming active or a completed event has scheduled date, this date should still be shown in the workspace. 
It’ll be locked with an icon next to it and a tooltip saying “Scheduled date cannot be changed for active/completed events”. 

#### Scheduled date with Hide due date enabled { #scheduled-date-with-hide-due-date-enabled } 
If the flag “Hide due date” in the Maintenance configuration is enabled, scheduled date will not be shown in the form. 

However, you can still schedule an event, but it automatically chooses the date based on "Scheduled days from start" that has been configured in Maintenance, and this can not be changed. 
In the **Schedule** tab, there will be “Schedule info” saying “Scheduled automatically for xx/xx/xx”, and the user can click  **Schedule** button.

### Ask user to complete program when stage is complete { #ask-user-to-complete-program-when-stage-is-complete } 
If this flag has been enabled for the stage in Stage details in Maintenance, a modal will show up after the user checks the **Complete** event checkbox and clicks save.

![](resources/images/ask-user-to-complete-enrollment-edit-event.png)

#### View mode { #view-mode } 

When the form is in the view mode the title of the page will appear as: `Enrollment: View Event`. You can see in the page all the information related to the event. Click the `Edit event` button to switch to the edit mode. 
This mode is bypassed for events that are scheduled.

![](resources/images/enrollment-event-view-edit-view.png)

#### Edit mode { #edit-mode } 

When the form is in the edit mode the title of the page will appear as: `Enrollment: Edit Event`. You can modify the event and click the `Save` button. Click the `Cancel` button to switch to the view mode without saving the changes.
Scheduled events are are the exception and they are opened in edit mode directly, without the user having to click `Edit event`. Click the `Cancel` button to go back to the enrollment dashboard page without saving the changes.

![](resources/images/enrollment-event-view-edit-edit.png)

In this form you can also delete the event by clicking `Delete` button, a modal will appear to confirm if you want to delete this event. You will then be navigated back to Enrollment dashboard page.

![](resources/images/enrollment-edit-event-delete.png)

#### Widgets in View/Edit event page { #widgets-in-viewedit-event-page } 

The widgets seen in the right-hand column will display and function the same way as mentioned in the [enrollment dashboard](#enrollment-dashboard).

##### Widget assignee { #widget-assignee } 
1. In View/Edit enrollment event page

2. In the right column you will find the assignee widget.

    ![](resources/images/user_assignment_edit_enrollment.png)

3. Click the **Edit** button, or the **Assign** button if the event is not currently assigned to anyone.

    ![](resources/images/user_assignment_edit_button.png)

    ![](resources/images/user_assignment_edit_add.png)

4. Search for and select the user you would like to reassign the event to. Click the **Save** button.

![](resources/images/enrollment-event-view-edit-widgets.png)

## Enrollment event new page { #enrollment-event-new-page } 

You can reach this page add event page by clicking in the **New {stage event name}** button in the overview page. 
In this page you can switch between different tabs: **Report** to add new event, **Schedule** to schedule an event and **Refer** to refer event.
If you have unsaved changes in one tab and switch to another tab, there will be a warning displayed.

### New event widget form { #new-event-widget-form } 

This is the form where you can modify the event details before saving. In the header you can see the stage name and icon.

![](resources/images/new-event-widget-form-header.png)

### New event page without a stage { #new-event-page-without-a-stage } 

If you enter the new event page with no stage selected, a list of available stages will be displayed.
Select the stage you want to add a new event in by clicking the associated button.
To navigate back to the enrollment overview, click the **Cancel without saving**-button

![](resources/images/enrollment-event-new-stage-selection-list.png)

### Ask user to complete program when stage is complete { #ask-user-to-complete-program-when-stage-is-complete } 
If this flag has been enabled for the stage in Stage details in Maintenance, a modal will show up after the user clicks the **Complete** button.

![](resources/images/ask-user-to-complete-enrollment-new-event.png)

### Ask user to create new event when stage is complete { #ask-user-to-create-new-event-when-stage-is-complete } 
If this flag has been enabled for the stage in Stage details in Maintenance, a modal will show up after the user clicks the **Complete** button or checks the **Complete** event checkbox and clicks save. The user can choose the button **Yes, create new event** to navigate to the New Event page or **No, cancel** to navigate back to the enrollment dashboard. If there is only one possible stage available, the user will be taken directly to the New event workspace for that stage.


### Assigning user to new events { #assigning-user-to-new-events } 
When reporting or scheduling an event, you can assign a user to it. This feature must be enabled per program stage in a tracker program by clicking the "Allow user assignment of events" check box.

Você encontrará a seção responsável perto da parte inferior da página de entrada de dados. Pesquise e selecione o usuário ao qual deseja atribuir o evento. O responsável será preservado quando você salvar o evento.

![](resources/images/user_assignment_report_new.png)

![](resources/images/user_assignment_schedule_new_filled.png)

### Schedule event widget form { #schedule-event-widget-form } 
Instead of reporting an event the user can select to schedule an event for later. The form will open with a suggested scheduled date. This date is determined by a set of rules as explained below.

The suggested date for the first event of a program stage in an enrollment is always based on the enrollment date or the incident date (depending on the program configuration). The program stage configuration setting "scheduled days from start" will be added to the base date to cumpute the suggested date.

#### 1. **Default next scheduled date** { #1-default-next-scheduled-date } 
If a program stage has a default next scheduled date configured, the suggested date is the most recent next scheduled date. Below is an example of how this can work.
>
1. A data element with value type date needs to be created and assigned to the particular program stage with access to future dates. The name of the data element could for example be: Next suggested follow up date. The program stage is configured to use the data element as default when scheduling a new event by assigning the data element to default next scheduled date.

![](resources/images/schedule_event_01.png)

2. A program rule based on the data entered in the program stage, will determine how many days until the next suggested follow up will be. For example: A program rule with the following condition: #{penta_dose} == '1' (The program rule will trigger when the TEI has received Penta Dose 1), Assign value to the data element: next suggested follow up date with expression: d2:addDays(V{event_date}, '30') **The number suggest how many days from event date the next scheduled event should be.** 

3. Open the Capture app and create a TEI. As long as Penta Dose has value Dose 1, the suggested next scheduled event is 30 days forward from event date. When scheduling a new event, the system will pick up from the data element as long it has value.

![](resources/images/schedule_event_02.png)

![](resources/images/schedule_event_03.png)

![](resources/images/schedule_event_04.png)

User can also find more information about how many events that scheduled on the same selected date or the interval of selected date and the suggested date from the information box.

Below the schedule date entry, user can choose to add a note to the scheduled event.

After clicking **Schedule** button, user will be navigated back to enrollment overview page.

#### 2. **Standard interval days**  { #2-standard-interval-days } 

1. If the program stage has standard interval days configured, the suggested date is calculated by the most recent event date plus the standard interval days value. 

![](resources/images/standard_interval_days_01.png)

2. If the program stage do not have a default next scheduled date configured, the system will use the standard interval days to calculate the next scheduled event date. 

![](resources/images/standard_interval_days_02.png)


#### 3. **If no value is found on either, the suggested date will be defined by enrollment date and incident date.**  { #3-if-no-value-is-found-on-either-the-suggested-date-will-be-defined-by-enrollment-date-and-incident-date } 

1. In case the option **Generate events based on enrollment date** is checked in the Maintenance app, the next suggested event date is calculated by the enrollment date plus the value of scheduled days from start. 

![](resources/images/schedule_event_from_enrollmentdate_01.png)

2. In case the option **Show incident date** is checked, the next suggested event date is calculated by the incident date plus the value of scheduled days from start.

![](resources/images/schedule_event_from_incidentdate_01.png)

## Program stage event list  { #program-stage-event-list } 

You can reach the program stage event list by clicking **Go to full {stage event name}** button in the overview page.

### Stage Event list  { #stage-event-list } 

In this view you can see all events in a stage 

#### Stage Event list header { #stage-event-list-header } 

In the header, you can see the stage name and icon 

![](resources/images/program-stage-event-list-header.png)

## Attribute option combo for Tracker { #attribute-option-combo-for-tracker } 

You can add segregation to your Tracker event data using attribute option combos. To get started, add a category combination to your Tracker program configuration.

The attribute option combo selector will be displayed when you are adding or changing/viewing Tracker events. Additionally, the selector will be displayed when enrolling if events are being auto-generated as part of the enrollment process.

Example from new Tracker event:

![](resources/images/attribute-option-combo-tracker.png)


# Usando o aplicativo Event Capture { #event_capture_app } 

## Sobre o aplicativo Event Capture { #about_event_capture_app } 

![](resources/images/event_capture/event_list.png)

In the **Event Capture** app you register events that occurred at a
particular time and place. An event can happen at any given point in
time. This stands in contrast to routine data, which can be captured for
predefined, regular intervals. Events are sometimes called cases or
records. In DHIS2, events are linked to a program. The **Event Capture**
app lets you select the organisation unit and program and specify a date
when a event happened, before entering information for the event.

The **Event Capture** app works online and offline. If the Internet
connectivity drops, you can continue to capture events. The events will
be stored locally in your web browser (client). When connectivity has
returned, the system will ask you to upload the locally stored data. The
system then sends the data to the server where the data is stored.

> **Note**
> 
> If you close the web browser while in offline mode, it is not possible
> to reopen a new web browser window and continue the working session.
> However the data will still be saved locally and can be uploaded to
> the server the next time the machine is online and the you have logged
> into the server.

  - You only see programs associated with the organisation unit you've
    selected and programs you've access to view through your user role.

  - Both skip-logic and validation error/warning messages are supported
    during registration.

  - When you close an organisation unit, you can't register or edit
    events to this organisation unit in the **Event Capture** app. You
    can still view and filter the event list and view the details of an
    event.

  - On-the-fly indicator expression evaluation is supported. If a
    program has indicators defined for it and the moment all values
    related to the indicator expression are filled, the system will
    calculate indicator and display the result.

    ![](resources/images/event_capture/event_editing.png)

  - **Sorting:** this can be done by clicking the sorting icon of each
    column header. A red sorting icon implies the current sorting
    column. However, the sorting functionality works only within the
    page displayed. Currently, it is not possible to do sorting from
    serverside.

  - **Filtering:** this is done by clicking the small search icon shown
    to the right of each column header. Clicking them provides an input
    field to type a filtering criteria. The system starts applying the
    filter the moment a user starts to type. During filtering it is
    possible to define start and end dates for date type data elements
    and lower and upper limits for number types. Server side filtering
    is not-support at the moment.

## Cadastre um evento { #event_capture_register_event } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Event Capture **.

2.  Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3.  Selecione um programa.

    You'll only see programs associated with the selected organisation
    unit and programs you've access to through your user role.

4.  Clique em ** Registrar evento **.

5.  Selecione uma data.

6.  Preencha as informações necessárias.

    If the program's program stage is configured to capture GPS
    coordinate, you can enter the coordinates in two ways:

      - Insira os valores diretamente nos campos correspondentes.

      - Choose a location in a map. The map option also displays
        polygons and points that are defined for organisation units.

7.  Clique em ** Salvar e adicionar novo ** ou ** Salvar e voltar **.

> Note: Some data elements in an event might be mandatory (marked with a red star next to the data element lable).
> What this means is that all mandatory data elements must be filled in before the user is allowed to save the event.
> The exception to this is if the user has the authority called __"Ignore validation of required fields in Tracker and Event Capture".__
> If the user has this authority, the mandatory data elements will not be required to be filled in before saving and
> the red star will not be displayed next to the data element lable. Note that super user that have the __"ALL"__ authority automatically
> have this authority.

## Editar um evento { #event_capture_edit_event } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Event Capture **.

2.  Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3.  Selecione um programa.

    Todos os eventos registrados no programa selecionado aparecem em uma lista.

4.  Clique no evento que deseja modificar e selecione ** Editar **.

5.  Modifique os detalhes do evento e clique em ** Atualizar **.

## Editar eventos na grade { #event_capture_edit_event_grid } 

The **Edit in grid** function allows you to edit a selected event within
the table but only those columns (data elements) visible in the grid. If
you need more columns, use **Show/hide columns** to specify which
columns should be displayed in the list.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Event Capture **.

2.  Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3.  Selecione um programa.

    Todos os eventos registrados no programa selecionado aparecem em uma lista.

4.  Clique no evento que deseja modificar e selecione ** Editar na grade **.

5.  Modifique os detalhes do evento.

6.  Clique em outro evento para fechar o modo de edição.

## Compartilhe eventos no modo de edição { #event_capture_share_event_edit_mode } 

Você pode compartilhar um evento no modo de edição por meio de seu endereço da web.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Event Capture **.

2.  Abra o evento que deseja compartilhar no modo de edição.

3.  Copie o URL.

    Make sure that the URL contains "event" and "ou" (organisation unit)
    parameters.

4.  Paste the URL in the sharing method of your choice, for example an
    e-mail or a message within DHIS2.

    If you're not logged in to DHIS2 when you click the link, you'll be
    asked to do so and then taken to the dashboard.

## Ver um histórico de auditoria de evento { #event_capture_view_event_audit_history } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Event Capture **.

2.  Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3.  Selecione um programa.

    Todos os eventos registrados no programa selecionado aparecem em uma lista.

4.  Clique em um evento e selecione ** Histórico de auditoria **.

## Excluir um evento { #event_capture_delete_event } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Event Capture **.

2.  Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3.  Selecione um programa.

    Todos os eventos registrados no programa selecionado aparecem em uma lista.

4.  Clique em um evento e selecione ** Remover **.

5.  Clique em ** Remover ** para confirmar a exclusão.

## Modificar o layout de uma lista de eventos { #event_capture_modify_event_list_layout } 

You can select which columns to show or hide in an event list. This can
be useful for example when you have a long list of data elements
assigned to a program stage. Once you've modified the layout, it's saved
on your user profile. You can have different layouts for different
programs.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Event Capture **.

2.  Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3.  Selecione um programa.

    Todos os eventos registrados no programa selecionado aparecem em uma lista.

4.  Clique no ícone ** Mostrar / ocultar colunas **.

5.  Selecione as colunas que deseja exibir e clique em ** Fechar **.

## Imprimir uma lista de eventos { #event_capture_print_event_list } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Event Capture **.

2.  Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3.  Selecione um programa.

    Todos os eventos registrados no programa selecionado aparecem em uma lista.

4.  Clique em ** Imprimir lista **.

## Baixe uma lista de eventos { #event_capture_download_event_list } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Event Capture **.

2.  Selecione uma unidade organizacional.

3.  Selecione um programa.

    Todos os eventos registrados no programa selecionado aparecem em uma lista.

4.  Clique no ícone ** Downlad ** e selecione um formato.

    Você pode baixar uma lista de eventos nos formatos XML, JSON ou CSV.




# Usando o aplicativo Tracker Capture { #tracker_capture_app } 

## Sobre o aplicativo Tracker Capture { #about_tracker_capture_app } 

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tracker-capture-tei-list.png)

The **Tracker Capture** app is an advanced version of the **Event
Capture** app.

  - **Event Capture**: handles single events *without* registration

  - **Tracker Capture**: handles multiple events (including single
    event) *with* registration.

  - You capture event data for a registered tracked entity instance
    (TEI).

  - You only see programs associated with the organisation unit you've
    selected and programs you've access to view through your user role.

  - The options you see in the search and register functions depend on
    the program you've selected. The program attributes control these
    options. The attributes also decide the columns names in the TEI
    list.

    Se você não selecionar um programa, o sistema escolherá os atributos padrão.

  - Both skip-logic and validation error/warning messages are supported
    during registration.

  - When you close an organisation unit, you can't register or edit
    events to this organisation unit in the **Tracker Capture** app. You
    can still search for TEIs and filter the search results. You can
    also view the dashboard of a particular TEI.

## Sobre painéis de instância de entidade rastreada (TEI) { #about_tracked_entity_instance_dashboard } 

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tei_dashboard.png)

Você gerencia um TEI a partir do painel do TEI no aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

  - The dashboard consist of widgets. Drag and drop the widgets to place
    them in the order and in the position you want.

  - Click the pin icon to stick the right column of widgets to a fix
    position. This is useful especially during data entry.

    If you have many data elements or big form to fill in, stick the
    right widget column. Then all the widgets you've placed in the right
    column remain visible while you scroll in the data entry part.

  - Any indicator defined for the program you've selected will have its
    value calculated and displayed in the **Indicators** widget.

  - Navegação:

      - ** Voltar **: leva você de volta à página de pesquisa e registro

      - Previous and next buttons: takes you to the previous or next TEI
        dashboard in the TEI search results list

    <!-- end list -->

      - **Other programs** field: if the TEI is enrolled in other
        programs, they're listed here. Click a program to change the
        program for which you enter data for the selected TEI. When you
        change programs, the content in the widgets change too.

## Fluxo de Trabalho { #workflow_tracker_capture } 

Working process of Mother and child health
program

![](resources/images/patients_programs/name_based_information_tracking_process.png)

1.  Crie um novo ou encontre um TEI existente.

    Você pode pesquisar em atributos definidos, por exemplo nome ou endereço.

2.  Inscreva o TEI em um programa.

3.  Based on the services of the program by the time, the app creates an
    activity plan for the TEI.

4.  The TEI is provided with various services depending on the program.
    All services are recorded.

5.  Use informações sobre os casos individuais para criar relatórios.

## Vinculando ao aplicativo Tracker Capture { #linking_to_the_tracker_capture_app } 

### Link para um programa específico na "tela inicial" { #link-to-a-specific-program-on-the-home-screen } 
Você pode compartilhar uma seleção de programa na "tela inicial.

1. Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2. Select the program you want to link to.

3. Copie o URL.

    * Certifique-se de que o URL contém o parâmetro "programa".

4. Paste the URL in the sharing method of your choice, for example an
  e-mail or a message within DHIS2.

  > Note: If the program does not exist in the selected organisation unit (that is stored in the local cache) the system will instead
  > select the first available program for that organisation unit. If the local cache is empty/clean and the root organisation unit
  > of the current user does not have the specified program, the system will also here select the first available program for the root
  > organisation unit.

### Vinculando ao painel TEI { #linking-to-tei-dashboard } 
Você pode compartilhar um painel TEI por meio de seu endereço da web.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra o painel que você deseja compartilhar.

3.  Copie o URL.

    Make sure that the URL contains "tei", "program" and "ou"
    (organisation unit) parameters.

4.  Paste the URL in the sharing method of your choice, for example an
    e-mail or a message within DHIS2.

    If you're not logged in to DHIS2 when you click the link, you'll be
    asked to do so and then taken to the dashboard.

## Crie um TEI e inscreva-o em um programa { #create_and_enroll_tracked_entity_instance } 

Você pode criar um TEI e inscrever esse TEI em um programa em uma operação:

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  In the organisation unit tree in the left hand pane, select an
    organisation unit.

3.  Selecione um programa.

4.  Clique em ** Registrar **.

5.  Preencha as informações necessárias.

    Both tracked entity type and program can be configured to use a feature type.
    This makes it possible to capture geometry for either the TEI or the enrollment.
    Supported feature type is Point and Polygon. Please see **How to use geometry**.

6. If the selected program is configured to display first stage during registration, 
   all mandatory fields in the stage will have to be filled in. At the end of the stage
   you will also be asked if you want to complete the stage that you have entered data for.
   If you select **Yes**, the stage will have the status completed once saved. If you select **No**, 
   the stage will have the status active.

7.  If searching for program is configured, a background search will be
    performed on searchable fields to help you prevent registering
    duplicates. If there is any matching TEIs, a blue box will be
    displayed on the right side of the form with the possibility to view
    these matching
TEIs.

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tracker_capture_register_integrated_search.png)

If there is any matching TEIs, click **Continue** to review possible
duplicates before registering a new one.

If there is no matching TEIs, click **Save and continue** or **Save and
add new**

  - **Save and continue**: completes the registration and opens the
    registered TEI's dashboard

  - **Save and add new**: completes the registration but stays on the
    same page. Use this option when you want to register and enroll one
    TEI after another without enter data.

> Note: All mandatory attributes have to be filled in to be able to save. 
> Mandatory attributes are marked with a red star next to the attribute label.
> If the user has the authority called __"Ignore validation of required fields in Tracker and Event Capture"__
> you will not be required to fill in the mandatory attributes and will 
> not see the red star next to the attribute label. Note that super user 
> that have the __"ALL"__ authority automatically have this authority.

## Abra um painel TEI existente { #open_existing_tracked_entity_instance_dashboard } 

There are multiple ways to find a TEI: Using the "Lists" which is
predefined lists in the current selection, or "Search" for global
lookup.

### Listas { #simple_tracked_entity_instance_search } 

Lists is used to find and display TEIs in the selected organisation unit
and program.

1.  Abra o aplicativo de captura rastreada

2.  In the organisation unit tree in the left hand pane, select an
    organisation unit

3.  Selecione um programa

4.  Clique no botão "Listas" se ainda não estiver selecionado

Se não for configurado, um conjunto de listas predefinidas estará disponível:

1.  Qualquer TEI com qualquer status de inscrição

2.  TEIs com uma inscrição ativa do programa atual

3.  TEIs com inscrição concluída no programa atual

4.  TEIs com inscrição cancelada do programa atual

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tracker_capture_lists.png)

You can select which columns to show or hide in the lists for each
program. This will be saved in your user settings.

1.  Clique no botão do ícone ** grade **

2.  Verifique as colunas que deseja incluir

3.  Clique em ** Salvar **

There is also an option to create a custom working list with own
filters. This can be used to create custom lists on the fly.

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tracker_capture_lists_custom.png)

As listas também podem ser baixadas ou impressas.

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tracker_capture_lists_download.png)

#### Listas predefinidas personalizadas { #custom-predefined-lists } 

If the program has any custom tracked entity filters associated with it,
these will take the place of the four predefined lists mentioned above.
The predefined lists will when well configured be an effective way to find
or work with the data relevant for the user in that program.

Working lists can be defined with a wide variety of options, here are some
examples:

- Display all TEIs with at least one event in a given program stage that has a due date on the current date.
- Display all TEIs that has at least one event that is assigned to the logged in user.
- Exibe todos os TEIs ativos, mas não atribuídos a nenhum usuário.

![Predefined working lists in tracker capture](resources/images/tracker_capture/predefined_working_list_based_on_user_assignment.png)

See the API documentation for a full list of functionality supported for
these predefined tracked entity instance filters.

### Procurar { #advanced_tracked_entity_instance_search } 

Search is used to search for TEIs in the organisation units the user has
search access to. This can be used if you want to find a TEI, but you
don't know which organisation unit or program the TEI was enrolled in.
There are two ways of doing this: With and without a program context.
Searchable fields needs to be configured. For configuring searching with
program context, this is done individually for each program in the
program maintenance app. For configuring searching without a program
context, this is done individually for each tracked entity type in the
tracked entity type maintenance app.

** Pesquisando sem um contexto de programa: **

1.  Abra o ** aplicativo Tracker Capture **

2.  Clique no botão ** Pesquisar **

3.  Searchable fields will be displayed in groups. Unique attributes is
    only individually searchable. Non-unique attributes can be combined.

4.  Preencha os critérios de pesquisa e clique no botão do ícone ** pesquisar **.

** Pesquisando com um contexto de programa: **

1.  Abra o ** aplicativo Tracker Capture **

2.  Select an organisation unit which has the program you wish to search
    in

3.  Selecione o programa

4.  Clique no botão ** Pesquisar **

5.  Searchable fields will be displayed in groups. Unique attributes is
    only individually searchable. Non-unique attributes can be combined.

6.  Preencha os critérios de pesquisa e clique no botão do ícone ** pesquisar **

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tracker_capture_search_screen.png)

After the search has been done, you will be presented with the search
result. Whats displayed depends on the outcome of the search.

Para pesquisa de atributo exclusivo:

  - If no matching TEI found, you will get the possibility to open the
    registration form.

  - If the TEI was found in the selected organisation unit, the TEI
    dashboard will automatically open.

  - If the TEI was found in outside the selected organisation unit, you
    will get the possibility to open the TEI.

Para pesquisa de atributos não exclusivos:

  - If no matching TEI's found, you will get the possibility to open the
    registration form.

  - If matching TEI's found, you can either click on any TEI in the
    result list, or open the registration form.

  - If a too large number of matches was found, you will be prompted to
    refine your search criteria

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tracker_capture_search_results.png)

The search results have functionality for flagging tracked entity instances
as possible duplicates, see next chapter.

When choosing to open the registration form, the search values will
automatically be filled into the registration form.

### Sinalizando instância de entidade rastreada como possível duplicata { #flagging-tracked-entity-instance-as-potential-duplicate } 

When searching for tracked entity instances in the tracker capture app, the user
will sometimes suspect that one or more of the search hits are duplicates of
other tracked entity instances. The user has the option of clicking on the
**flag possible duplicate** link in the rightmost column of the search result grid.

Tracked entity instances flagged in this way will be marked as "possible duplicate"
in the DHIS2 database. The flag indicates that the tracked entity instance is/has a
duplicate. The presence of such a flag is visible to the user in two places. One is
the result list itself (in this example Mark Robinson is already flagged as a potential
duplicate):

![Tracker capture search results](resources/images/tracker_capture/tracker_capture_search_results.png)

O outro lugar é dentro do painel da instância da entidade rastreada:

![Tracked entity instance flagged as duplicate](resources/images/tracker_capture/tracked_entity_instance_flagged_as_duplicate.png)

In addition to informing users about the tracked entity instance potentially
being a duplicate, the  flag will be used by the underlying system for finding and
merging duplicates in coming versions of DHIS2.

### Quebrando o vidro { #break_glass } 

If the program is configured with access level **protected**, and the
user searches and finds tracked entity instances that is owned by
organisation unit that the user does not have data capture authority
for, the user is presented with the option of breaking the glass. The
user will give a reason for breaking the glass, then gain temporary
ownership of the tracked entity
instance.

## Inscreva-se em um TEI existente em um programa { #enroll_existing_tracked_entity_instance_in_program } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  Selecione um programa.

4.  No widget ** Enrollment **, clique em ** Add new **.

5.  Preencha as informações necessárias e clique em ** Inscrever-se **.

## Insira os dados do evento para um TEI { #enter_event_data_for_tracked_entity_instance } 

### Widgets para entrada de dados { #widgets-for-data-entry } 

#### 

In a TEI dashboard, you enter event data in the **Timeline Data entry**
or **Tabular data entry** widgets.



Table: Data entry widgets in the Tracker Capture app

| Widget name | Descrição |
|---|---|
| **Timeline Data entry** | For data entry using either default or custom forms.<br> <br>Depending on program definition, in particular program stages, events will be displayed in a timely fashion. Clicking on any of them displays the corresponding data entry. If a stage needs new event, a plus icon is displayed for new event creation. To proceed with data entry, it is mandatory to have event date. Once an event date is specified it is not possible to change due date. The assumption is that by specifying event date, the event has already taken place. If the event hasn't occurred yet, it is possible to change due date - this is effectively doing nothing but rescheduling. The buttons at the bottom help to change the status of a selected event.<br> <br>Another key feature from this widget is addition of multiple notes for an event. Normally data recording is through data elements, however there are cases where it is necessary to record additional information or comments. This is where the notes section comes handy. However it is not possible to delete a note. The idea is notes are more like log books. Both skip-logic and validation error/warning messages are supported during data entry.<br> <br>Also included in the Timeline Data entry is the option to compare your data entry to previous entries. This can be enabled by clicking the "Switch to compare form" button (Two sheets of paper) in the top right corner of the Timeline Data entry widget. |
| **Tabular data entry** | For tabular-style data entry.<br> <br>The widget displays the list of program stages as left-hand side labels. Events will be listed in table for repeatable program stage, and allows for in-line edits of event data values. |

### Criação de um evento { #creating-an-event } 

Você pode criar um evento para um TEI:

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  In the **Timeline Data entry** or **Tabular data entry** widget,
    click the **+**-button.

4.  Select a **Program stage** and set a **Report date**.

    Program stages can be configured to use a feature type.
    This makes it possible to capture geometry for an event.
    Supported feature type is Point and Polygon. Please see **How to use geometry**.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Agende um evento { #schedule-an-event } 

You can schedule an event for a future date by:

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  In the **Timeline Data entry** or **Tabular data entry** widget,
    click the **Calendar** icon.

4.  Select a **Program stage** and set a **Schedule date**.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Indique um evento { #refer-an-event } 

Sometimes it might be necessary to refer a patient to a different
**Organisation unit**. To refer a TEI:

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  In the **Timeline Data entry** or **Tabular data entry** widget,
    click the **Arrow** icon.

4.  Select a **Program stage**, **Organisation unit** and set a
    ****Report date****.

5.  Click either **One-time referral** which will only refer TEI for one
    single event or **Move permanently** which will move TEI ownership
    to the selected **Organisation Unit**. Further access to the TEI
    will be based on the ownership organisation unit.

### Elementos de dados obrigatórios em eventos { #mandatory-data-elements-in-events } 
Some data elements in an event might be mandatory (marked with a red star next to the data element label).
What this means is that all mandatory data elements must be filled in before the user is allowed to complete the event.
The exception to this is if the user has the authority called __"Ignore validation of required fields in Tracker and Event Capture".__
If the user has this authority, the mandatory data elements will not be required to be filled in before saving and
the red star will not be displayed next to the data element label. Note that super user that have the __"ALL"__ authority automatically
have this authority.

## Como usar geometria { #how-to-use-geometry } 

Tracked entity type, program and program stage can be configured to
use a feature type. This makes it possible to capture geometry for a
TEI, program or event. Supported feature types are Point and Polygon.

### Capturar coordenadas { #capture-coordinate } 
** Opção 1: ** Preencha a latitude e longitude no campo.

**Opção 2:**
1.  Clique no ** ícone do mapa **
2.  Find the location you want by either searching or locating it on
    the map
3.  Clique com o botão direito no local desejado e escolha ** Definir coordenada **
4.  Clique em ** Capturar ** na parte inferior

### Capturar polígono { #capture-polygon } 
1.  Clique no ** ícone do mapa **
2.  Find the location you want by either searching or locating it on
    the map
3.  No canto superior esquerdo do mapa, clique no ** ícone do polígono **
4.  Draw a polygon on the map. To finish, connect the last point with
    the first point
5.  Clique em ** Capturar ** na parte inferior

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/capture_geometry.png)

Os polígonos também podem ser excluídos
1.  Clique no ** ícone do mapa **
2.  Click the **trash can icon** at the left side of the map, and select
    **Clear all**

## Como atribuir um usuário a um evento { #how-to-assign-a-user-to-an-event } 

In the Maintenance App a program stage can be configured to allow user assignment.
If user assignment is enabled, you will be able to assign a user to an event.

1. Clique no campo ** Usuário atribuído **.
2. Role ou pesquise um usuário.
3. Clique no usuário.

## Gerenciar as inscrições de um TEI { #manage_tracked_entity_instance_enrollment } 
The Enrollment widget gives access to information and functionality
for the enrollment in the selected program.

![Enrollments widget](resources/images/tracker_capture/enrollment_widget.png)

### TEI ownership { #tei-ownership } 

The current ownership of all enrollments in the selected program is displayed
in the "Owned by" part of the enrollment widget. The ownership will always start
out as the organisation unit that first enrolled the TEI into the given program.

Ownership can be different for a TEIS different programs, for example one clinic can
follow up a patient in HIV, while another clinic follows up the same patient in MCH.

To update the ownership for a TEI/program combination, the user has to utilize the
referral functionality and select the "Move permanently" option while referring.

A user that has capture access to the organisation unit that is the current owner of the
TEI/Program will have write access to all enrollments for that TEI/Program combination.
A user that has search access to the organisation unit that is the current owner will have
access to search and find the TEI/Program combination.

### Desative a inscrição de um TEI { #deactivate_tracked_entity_instance_enrollment } 

If you deactivate a TEI dashboard, the TEI becomes 'read-only'. You
can't enter data, enroll the TEI or edit the TEI's profile.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  No widget ** Enrollment **, clique em ** Desativar **.

4.  Clique em ** Sim ** para confirmar.

### Ative a inscrição de um TEI { #activate_tracked_entity_instance_enrollment } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  No widget ** Enrollment **, clique em ** Activate **.

4.  Click **Yes** to
confirm.

### Marque a inscrição do TEI como completa { #mark_tracked_entity_instance_enrollment_complete } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  No widget ** Enrollment **, clique em ** Complete **.

4.  Click **Yes** to
confirm.

### Reabrir inscrição concluída { #reopen_complete_tracked_entity_instance_enrollment } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  No widget ** Enrollment **, clique em ** Reaopen **.

4.  Click **Yes** to
confirm.

### Exibir histórico de inscrição do TEI { #display_tracked_entity_instance_enrollment_history } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  No widget ** Perfil **, clique no ícone ** Histórico de auditoria **.

### Crie uma nota de inscrição TEI { #create_tracked_entity_instance_enrollment_note } 

An enrollment note is useful to record information about for example why
an enrollment was cancelled.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  No widget ** Notes **, digite sua nota e clique em ** Add **.

## Envie uma mensagem para um TEI { #send_message_to_tracked_entity_instance } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  No widget ** Mensagens ** e selecione ** SMS ** ou ** E-mail **.

4.  Insira as informações de contato necessárias.

    If the TEI's profile contains an e-mail address or a phone number,
    these fields are filled in automatically.

5.  Digite uma mensagem.

6.  Clique em ** Enviar **.

## Marque um TEI para acompanhamento { #mark_tracked_entity_instance_for_follow_up } 

You can use mark a TEI's enrollment for follow-up and then use this
status as a filter when you create **Upcoming events** and **Overdue
events** reports. This can be useful for example to monitor high-risk
cases during a pregnancy program.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  No widget ** Enrollment **, clique no ícone ** Mark for follow-up **.

## Editar o perfil de um TEI { #edit_tracked_entity_instance_profile } 

You edit a TEI's profile or tracked entity attributes in the **Profile**
widget.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  No widget ** Perfil **, clique em ** Editar **.

4.  Modifique o perfil e clique em ** Salvar **.

## Adicionar um relacionamento a um TEI { #add_relationship_to_tracked_entity_instance } 

You can create a relationship from one TEI to another, for example
linking a mother and a child together or a husband and a wife. Depending
on how the relationship type is configured, the relative can inherit
attributes.

Assume there are two programs: Antenatal care for the mother and
Immunization for the child. If first name, last name and address
attributes are required for both programs, it is possible to configure
last name and address attributes as inheritable. Then during child
registration, there is no need to enter these inheritable attributes.
You can add them automatically based on the mother's value. If you want
to have a different value for the child, you can override the
automatically generated value.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  No widget ** Relacionamentos ** e clique em ** Adicionar **.

4.  Selecione um tipo de relacionamento.

5.  Pesquise o parente e selecione-o. A pesquisa segue o mesmo padrão de busca por instâncias de entidades rastreadas na página inicial do rastreador. As pesquisas cobrem, por padrão, o escopo de pesquisa dos usuários.

6.  Selecione a instância da entidade rastreada que corresponde aos critérios de pesquisa no pop-up.

7.  Clique em **Salvar**.

> Note: If the relationship is a bi-directional relationship, the relationship will be displayed in the TEI that the relationship
> was created in and in the TEI that the relationship was linked to. Also, if the relationship is bi-directional, each end of the
> relationship will have a unique name that will be displayed in the relationship widget under the "Relationship" column.

## Compartilhe um painel TEI { #share_tracked_entity_instance_dashboard } 

Você pode compartilhar um painel TEI por meio de seu endereço da web.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra o painel que você deseja compartilhar.

3.  Copie o URL.

    Make sure that the URL contains "tei", "program" and "ou"
    (organisation unit) parameters.

4.  Paste the URL in the sharing method of your choice, for example an
    e-mail or a message within DHIS2.

    If you're not logged in to DHIS2 when you click the link, you'll be
    asked to do so and then taken to the dashboard.

## Desativar um TEI { #deactivate_tracked_entity_instance } 

If you deactivate a TEI, the TEI becomes 'read-only'. Data associated
with the TEI is not deleted.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  In the top right corner, click the
    ![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tc_tei_red_icon.png) button \>
    **Deactivate**.

4.  Clique em ** Sim ** para confirmar.

## Ative um TEI { #activate_tracked_entity_instance } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  In the upper top corner, click the
    ![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tc_tei_red_icon.png) button \>
    **Activate**.

4.  Clique em ** Sim ** para confirmar.

## Excluir um TEI { #delete_tracked_entity_instance } 

> ** Aviso **
>
> Ao excluir um TEI, você exclui todos os dados associados ao TEI.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  In the top right corner, click the
    ![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tc_tei_red_icon.png) button \>
    **Delete**.

4.  Click **Yes** to
confirm.

## Configure o painel TEI { #configure_tracked_entity_instance_dashboard } 

### Mostrar ou ocultar widgets { #tracked_entity_instance_dashboard_show_hide_widget } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  Clique no ícone ** Configurações ** e selecione ** Mostrar / ocultar widgets **.

4.  Selecione os widgets que você deseja mostrar ou ocultar.

5.  Clique em ** Fechar **.

### Salve o layout do painel como padrão { #tracked_entity_instance_dashboard_save_layout } 

Você pode salvar o layout do painel como padrão para um programa.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  Click the **Settings** icon, and select **Save dashboard layout as
    default**.

### Layout do painel de bloqueio { #lock-dashboards-layout } 

If you are the **administrator** you have the option of locking the
layout of the dashboard for all users.

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  Organize the widgets to the desired layout and save it as default
    (see section above).

4.  Click the **Settings** icon, and select **Lock layout for all
    users**.

Users will still be able to reorganize the widgets temporarily, but the
layout will be reset to the admin's saved layout after page refresh. The
remove widget buttons will be hidden when the dashboard layout is
locked.

### Barra superior { #top-bar } 

The top bar can be a helpful tool to see important data in a quick and
easy way. To start using the top bar:

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Abra um painel TEI existente.

3.  Clique no ícone ** Configurações ** e selecione ** Configurações da barra superior **.

4.  Click **Activate top bar** and click the data you would like to
    display in the top bar.

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/top_bar.png)

### Alterar o modo de exibição da tabela para o widget ** Timeline Data Entry ** { #change-table-display-mode-for-timeline-data-entry-widget } 

The **Timeline Data Entry** widget has 5 different table display modes that can be selected. The different options are:
- **Default form** - Shows all data elements vertically.

- **Compare form previous** - Shows the previous (repeatable) program stage next to the current selected program stage.

- **Compare form all** - Shows all previous (repeatable) program stages next to the current selected program stage.

- **Grid form** - Shows the data elements horizontally.

- ** Formulário POP-over ** - O mesmo que ** Formulário de grade **, mas quando clicado, os elementos de dados são exibidos em um pop-up.

Para alterar o modo de exibição atual, clique no segundo ícone na barra superior dos widgets (veja a imagem abaixo):

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/compareForm.png)

Once an option is selected the selection is stored for that specific program stage. This mean that you can have different table modes for the different program stages in a program.  

> **Notes:**
> 1.  *The **Compare form** options will function best if you have multiple repeatable events (of the same program stage) present.*
> 2.  *The **Grid form** and **POP-over form** options are not selectable if the program stage has more than 10 data elements.*
> 3.  *The icon in the widgets bar will change depending on the option you have selected.*

## Crie relatórios { #create_report_tracker_capture } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Tracker Capture **.

2.  Clique em ** Relatórios **.

3.  Selecione um tipo de relatório.



    Table: Report types in the Tracker Capture app

    | Report type | Description |
    |---|---|
    | Program summary | A summary report for a particular program, organisation unit and time frame. The report consist of a list of TEIs and their records organised based on program stages. |
    | Program statistics | A statistics report for a particular program. The report provides for example an overview of drop-outs or completion rates in a given time frame at a particular organisation unit. |
    | Upcoming events | A tabular report showing tracked entity instances and their upcoming events for a selected program and time. You can sort the columns and search the values. Show/hide operations are possible on the columns. You can also export the table to Microsoft Excel. |
    | Overdue events | A list of events for a selected program. The report displays a list of TEIs and their events that are not completed on time. You can sort the columns and search the values You can also export the table to Microsoft Excel. |

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/program_summary_report.png)

The summary report displays a list of TEIs and their records for
"MNCH/PNC (Adult Woman)" program. The records are organized in the form
of tabs where each tab is a program stage. The columns in the table are
data elements which are configured to be displayed in reports under
program stage definition.




# Data approval overview { #data_approval_overview } 

DHIS2 has an optional feature that allows authorized users to approve
data that has been entered. It allows data to be reviewed and approved
at selected levels in the organisation unit hierarchy, so the approval
follows the structure of the hierarchy from lower levels to higher
levels.

Data is approved for a combination of (a) period, (b) organisation unit
and (c) workflow. Data may be approved for the organisation unit for
which it is entered, as well as for higher-level organisation units to
which the data is aggregated. As part of system settings, you can choose
the organisation unit level(s) at which data is approved. It can be
approved at higher levels only after it has been approved for all that
organisation unit's descendants at lower levels for the same workflow
and period. When you approve a workflow, it approves data for any data
sets that have been assigned to that workflow.

After a period, organisation unit and workflow combination has been
approved, data sets associated with that workflow will be locked for
that period and organisation unit, and any further data entry or
modification will be prohibited unless it is first un-approved.

For example, the following diagram illustrates that data has already
been approved for organisation units C and D, for a given period and
workflow. It may now be approved for organisation unit B for the same
period and workflow. But it is not ready to be approved for organization
unit A. Before it can be approved for organisation unit A, it must be
approved for B, and for any other children of organisation unit A, for
that period and workflow.

![Approving at organisation
units](resources/images/data_approval/approval_hierarchy.png){.center width=50% }

## Aprovando e aceitando { #data_approvals_approving_accepting } 

DHIS2 supports two different types of approval processes: either a
one-step process where the data is approved at each level, or a two-step
process where data is first approved and then accepted at each level.
This is illustrated in the following diagram:

![Approving and
accepting](resources/images/data_approval/approval_level_steps.png){.center width=69% }

In the one-step process, data is approved at one level, and then
approved at the next higher level. Until it is approved at the next
higher level, it may be unapproved at the first level. (For example, if
the data was approved my mistake, this allows the approver to undo their
mistake.) Once the data is approved at the next higher level, it may not
be unapproved at the lower level unless it is first unapproved at the
higher level.

In the two-step process, data is approved at one level, and then the
approval is accepted at the same level. This acceptance is done by a
user who is authorized to approve data at the next higher level. Once
the data is accepted, it may not be changed or unapproved unless it is
first *unaccepted*.

The two-step process is not required by DHIS2. It is an optional step
for a user reviewing data at the next higher level. It has the benefit
of locking the acceptance from the level below, so reviewer does not
have to worry that the data could be changing from below while it is
being reviewed. It can also be used by the higher-level user to keep
track of which lower-level data has already been reviewed.

Two-step process can be activated by checking **Acceptance required
before approval** in SystemSettings app under General section.

## Autoridades para aprovação de dados { #data_approvals_authorities } 

To approve data, you must be assigned a role containing one of these
authorities:

  - **Approve data** - You may approve data for the organisation unit(s)
    to which you are assigned. Note that this authority does not allow
    you to approve data for lower-levels below the organisation unit(s)
    to which you are assigned. This is useful to separate the users
    authorized to approve at one level from the users authorized to
    approve at levels below.

  - **Approve data at lower levels** - Allows you to approve data for
    all lower levels below the organisation units assigned to you. This
    is useful if, for example, you are a district-level user whose role
    includes approving the data for all the facilities within that
    district, but not for the district itself. If you are assigned this
    as well as the *Approve data* authority, you may approve data at the
    level of the organisation unit(s) to which you have been assigned,
    and for any level below.

  - **Accept data at lower levels** - Allows you to accept data for the
    level just below the organisation unit(s) assigned to you. This
    authority can be given to the same users as approve data. Or it may
    be given to different users, if you want to have some users who
    accept data from the level below, and a different set of users who
    approve data to go up to the next level above.

## Configurando a aprovação de dados { #data_approvals_configuration } 

In the *Maintenance app* section under *Data approval level* you can
specify the levels at which you want to approve data in the system.
Click the Add new button on this page and select the organisation unit
level at which you want approvals. It will be added to the list of
approval settings. You may configure the system for approving data at
every organisation unit level, or only at selected organisation unit
levels.

Note that when you add a new approval level, you may optionally choose a
Category option group set. This feature is discussed later in this
chapter.

Also in maintenance under *Data approval workflow*, you can define the
workflows that will be used for approving data. Each workflow can be
associated with one or more approval levels. Any two workflows may
operate at all the same approval levels as each other, some of the same
and some different levels, or completely different levels.

If you want data for a data set to be approved according to a workflow,
then assign the workflow to the data set when you add or edit the data
set. If you do not want data for a data set to be subject to approval,
then do not assign any workflow to that data set. For data sets that you
want to approve at the same time as each other, assign them to the same
workflow. For data sets that you want to approve independently, assign
each data set to its own workflow.

Under *System Settings* -> *Analytics*, you can control what unapproved data (if any) will appear in analytics. See the "Analytics settings" section of this user guide. Note that users who are assigned to organisation units where data is ready for approval can alwyas view this data in analytics, as can users assigned to higher-level organisation units if they have the *Approve data at lower levels* authority or the *View unapproved data* authority.

## Visibilidade de dados { #data_approvals_data_visibility } 

If the option *Hide unapproved data in analytics* is enabled, data will
be hidden from viewing by users associated with higher levels. When
determining whether a data record should be hidden for a specific user,
the system associates a user with a specific approval level and compares
it to the level to which the data record has been approved up to. A user
is associated with the approval level which matches the level of the
organisation unit(s) she is linked to, or if no approvel level exists at
that level, the next approval level linked to an organisation unit level
below herself. A user will be allowed to see data which has been
approved up to the level immediately below her associated approval
level. The rationale behind this is that a user must be ablet to view
the data that has been approved below so that she can eventually view
and approve it herself.

Note that if the user has been granted the *View unapproved data* or the
*ALL* authority she will be able to view data irrespective of the
approval status.

*Lets consider the following example:* There are four organisation unit
levels, with approval levels associated with level 2 and 4. *User A* at
country level (1) gets associated with approval level 1 since the
approval level exists at the same level as the organisation unit level.
*User B* gets associated with approval level 2 since there is no
approval level directly linked to her organisation unit level and
approval level 2 is the immediate level below. *User C* gets associated
with approval level 2. *User D* is below all approval levels which
implies that she can see all data entered at or below her organisation
unit level.

![Hiding of unapproved
data](resources/images/data_approval/approval_data_hiding.png){.center}

Usando este exemplo, vamos considerar alguns cenários:

  - Data is entered at facility level: Only *User D* can see the data,
    as the data has not yet been approved at all.

  - Data is approved by *User D* at facility level: Data becomes visible
    to User C and User B, as the data is now approved at their level.

  - Data is approved by *User C* at district level: Data becomes visible
    to User A, as data is now approved at the level immediately below
    herself.

## Aprovando dados { #data_approvals_approving_data } 

To approve data, go to *Reports* and choose *Data Approval*. When this
report shows data that is configured for approval, it shows the approval
status of the data in the report. The approval status will be one of the
following:

  - **Waiting for lower level org units to approve** - This data is not
    yet ready to be approved, because it first needs to be approved for
    all the child organisation units to this organisation unit, for the
    same workflow and period.

  - **Ready for approval** - This data may now be approved by an
    authorized user.

  - ** Aprovado ** - Este dado já foi aprovado.

  - **Approved and accepted** - This data has already been approved, and
    also accepted.

If the data you are viewing is in an approval state that can be acted
upon, and if you have sufficient authority, one or more of the following
actions will be available to you on the *Data Approval* form:

  - **Approve** - Approve data that has not yet been approved, or that
    was formerly approved and has been unapproved.

  - **Unapprove** - Return to an unapproved state data that has been
    approved or accepted.

  - ** Aceitar ** - Aceita os dados que foram aprovados.

  - **Unaccept** - Return to an unaccepted (but still approved) state
    data that has been accepted.

In order to unapprove data for a given organisation unit, you must have
the authority to approve data for that organisation unit or to approve
data for a higher-level organisation unit to which that data is
aggregated. The reason for this is as follows: If you are reviewing data
for approval at a higher organisation unit level, you should consider
whether the data at lower organisation units are reasonable. If all
lower-level data looks good, you can approve the data at the higher
level. If some lower-level data looks suspect, you can unapprove the
data at the lower level. This allows the data to be reviewed again at
the lower level, corrected if necessary, and re-approved up through the
organisation unit levels according to the hierarchy.

## Aprovação por grupo de opções de categoria definido { #data_approvals_approving_by_cogs } 

When defining an approval level, you specify the organisation unit level
at which data will be approved. You may also optionally specify a
category option group set. This is useful if you are using category
option groups to define additional dimensions of your data, and you want
approvals to be based on these dimensions. The following examples
illustrate how this can be done within a single category option group
set, and by using multiple category option group sets.

### Aprovação por um grupo de opções de categoria definido { #approving-by-one-category-option-group-set } 

For example, suppose you define a category option group set to represent
NGOs who serve as healthcare partners at one or more organisation units.
Each category option group within this set represents a different
partner. The category option group for Partner 1 may group together
category options (such as funding account codes) that are used by that
partner as a dimension of the data. So data entered by Partner 1 is
attributed to a category option in Partner 1's category option group.
Whereas data entered by partner 2 is attributed to a category option in
Partner 2's category option group:

 <table align="center">
 <caption> Exemplo de grupos de opções de categoria </caption>
 <thead>
 <tr class="header">
 <th> Grupo de opções de categoria definido </th>
 <th> Grupo de opções de categoria </th>
 <th> Opções de categoria </th>
 </tr>
 </thead>
 <tbody>
 <tr class="odd">
 <td> Parceiro </td>
 <td> Parceiro 1 </td>
 <td> Conta 1A, Conta 1B </td>
 </tr>
 <tr class="even">
 <td> Parceiro </td>
 <td> Parceiro 2 </td>
 <td> Conta 2A, Conta 2B </td>
 </tr>
 </tbody>
 </table>

Each partner could enter data for their accounts independently of the
other, for the same or different workflows, at the same or different
facilities. So for example, data can be entered and/or aggregated at the
following levels for each partner, independently of each other:

![Example category option
groups](resources/images/data_approval/approval_partner_example.png){.center}

> **Tip**
> 
> You can use the sharing feature on category options and category
> option groups to insure that a user can enter data (and/or see data)
> only for certain category options and groups. If you don't want users
> to see data that is aggregated beyond of their assigned category
> options and/or category option groups, you can assign *Selected
> dimension restrictions for data analysis*, when adding or updating a
> user.

You can optionally define approval levels for partner data within any or
all of these organisation unit levels. For example, you could define any
or all of the following approval levels:

 <table align="center">
 <caption> Exemplo de categoria Grupo de opções Definir níveis de aprovação </caption>
 <thead>
 <tr class="header">
 <th> Nível de aprovação </th>
 <th> Nível de unidade organizacional </th>
 <th> Grupo de opções de categoria definido </th>
 </tr>
 </thead>
 <tbody>
 <tr class="odd">
 <td> 1 </td>
 <td> País </td>
 <td> Parceiro </td>
 </tr>
 <tr class="even">
 <td> 2 </td>
 <td> Distrito </td>
 <td> Parceiro </td>
 </tr>
 <tr class="odd">
 <td> 3 </td>
 <td> Instalação </td>
 <td> Parceiro </td>
 </tr>
 </tbody>
 </table>

## Aprovação por vários conjuntos de grupos de opções de categoria { #approving_by_multiple_category_option_group_sets } 

You can also define approval levels for different category option group
sets. To continue the example, suppose that you have various agencies
that manage the funding to the different partners. For example, Agency A
funds accounts 1A and 2A, while Agency B funds accounts 1B and 2B. You
could set up category option groups for Agency A, and Agency B, and make
them both part of a category option group set called Agency. So you
would have:

 <table align="center">
 <caption> Exemplo de grupos de opções de várias categorias </caption>
 <thead>
 <tr class="header">
 <th> Grupo de opções de categoria definido </th>
 <th> Grupo de opções de categoria </th>
 <th> Opções de categoria </th>
 </tr>
 </thead>
 <tbody>
 <tr class="odd">
 <td> Parceiro </td>
 <td> Parceiro 1 </td>
 <td> Conta 1A, Conta 1B </td>
 </tr>
 <tr class="even">
 <td> Parceiro </td>
 <td> Parceiro 2 </td>
 <td> Conta 2A, Conta 2B </td>
 </tr>
 <tr class="odd">
 <td> Agência </td>
 <td> Agência A </td>
 <td> Conta 1A, Conta 2A </td>
 </tr>
 <tr class="even">
 <td> Agência </td>
 <td> Agência B </td>
 <td> Conta 1B, Conta 2B </td>
 </tr>
 </tbody>
 </table>

Now suppose that at the country level, you want each partner to approve
the data entered by that partner. Once this approval is done, you want
each agency to then approve the data from accounts that are managed by
that agency. Finally, you want to approve data at the country level
across all agencies. You could do this by defining the following
approval levels:

 <table align="center">
 <caption> Exemplo de grupo de opções de múltiplas categorias Definir níveis de aprovação </caption>
 <thead>
 <tr class="header">
 <th> Nível de aprovação </th>
 <th> Nível de unidade organizacional </th>
 <th> Grupo de opções de categoria definido </th>
 </tr>
 </thead>
 <tbody>
 <tr class="odd">
 <td> 1 </td>
 <td> País </td>
 <td> </td>
 </tr>
 <tr class="even">
 <td> 2 </td>
 <td> País </td>
 <td> Agência </td>
 </tr>
 <tr class="odd">
 <td> 3 </td>
 <td> País </td>
 <td> Parceiro </td>
 </tr>
 </tbody>
 </table>

Note that multiple approval levels can be defined for the same
organisation unit level. In our example, Partner 1 would approve
country-wide data at approval level 3 from category options Account 1A
and Account 1B. Next, Agency A would approve country-wide data at
approval level 2 from category options Account 1A (after approval by
Partner 1) and Account 2A (after approval by Partner 2.) Finally, after
approval from all agencies, country-wide data can be approved at
approval level 1 across all category options. Note that approval level 1
does not specify a category option group set, meaning that it is for
approving data across all category options.

This example is meant to be illustrative only. You may define as many
category option groups as you need, and as many approval levels as you
need at the same organisation unit level for different category option
group sets.

If you have multiple approval levels for different category option group
sets at the same organisation unit level, you may change the approval
ordering in the *Settings* section, under *System Approval Settings*.
Just click on the approval level you wish to move, and select *Move up*
or *Move down*. If you have an approval level with no category option
groups set, it must be the highest approval level for that organisation
unit level.




# Data approval { #data_approval_app }

The **Data Approval** app provides an intuitive interface to support the approval process in line with the configured approval workflows.

## Selecting parameters { #selecting-parameters } 

### Select a workflow { #select-a-workflow } 

Start by selecting a workflow in the top left of the screen. If you only have access to a single workflow, it will be preselected for you.

![Select a workflow](resources/images/select_workflow.png)

### Select a period { #select-a-period } 

Proceed to select a period you would like to approve data for.

![Select a period](resources/images/select_period.png)

### Select an organisation unit { #select-an-organisation-unit } 

Finally, select an organisation unit you would like to approve data for. Each visible organisation unit in the tree is preceded with a status-icon. This icon serves as an indication of the actions available to your user profile for that organisation unit. In the screenshot below, "Badjia" is an organisation unit with status "ready for approval".

![Select an organisation unit](resources/images/select_org_unit.png)

### Clear selection { #clear-selection } 

Once a workflow, period, and organisation unit have been selected, a "Clear selections" button will appear. This button can be used to quickly clear all three fields and start a fresh selection.

## Approving data { #approving-data } 

### Review dataset reports { #review-dataset-reports } 

Once a workflow, period, and organisation unit have been selected, you can review the dataset reports for the datasets connected to the selected workflow. The data for each dataset is presented in a tab.

Datasets can have different period types than the workflow the are connected to. If this is the case, the approval app will show data for all the dataset-periods that end within the selected workflow period.

![Review dataset reports](resources/images/review_data.png)

### Take an approval action { #take-an-approval-action } 

Once you have reviewed the data in the datasets, you can proceed to take an approval action. The following actions are available:

-   Approve
-   Accept
-   Unapprove
-   Unaccept

Which of these actions are available for a given workflow at a given moment in time depends on the type of actions which have been taken already at the current and other levels of the organisational hierarchy.

In the example above the "approve" action is available. When you choose the "Approve" action, you are presented with a confirmation dialog as displayed below which summarises the datasets you are approving. The workflow is not approved until you click "Approve" to confirm there. Other actions take effect immediately and do not have a confirmation step.

![Take an approval action](resources/images/approval_confirmation.png)

After taking one of the approval actions, in this case after confirming the approval, the workflow is updated immediately and you see a the new approval status.

![Updated approval status](resources/images/approval_saved.png)

### Approval status tags { #approval-status-tags } 

As shown in the image above, the approval status is displayed in two places:

1. Above the dataset tabs, after the workflow information
1. Before the buttons on the bottom bar

These status tags may not always display the same information, because the have a slightly different meaning:

1. The status tag above the dataset represents the approval status of the workflow for the selected period and selected organisation unit
2. The status tag in the bottom bar does the same, but also takes your user profile.

A workflow may be ready to be approved at a given organisation unit level, but you do not have the appropriate authority to do so.



# Gerir painéis { #dashboard }

## About the Dashboards app { #about-the-dashboards-app } 

O aplicativo Dashboards torna possível apresentar uma visão geral de alto nível de seus dados, incluindo a exibição de objetos analíticos como mapas, gráficos, relatórios e tabelas, bem como a exibição de informações baseadas em texto, links de recursos e widgets de aplicativos.

Os recursos do aplicativo Dashboards incluem:

- Visualizar e imprimir painéis
- Criar e editar painéis
- Partilhar painéis com utilizadores e grupos de utilizadores
- Aplicar filtros temporários ao visualizar os painéis
- Visualização responsiva em dispositivos móveis e telas pequenas
- Acesse os painéis enquanto estiver off-line

## Layout do aplicativo de painéis { #dashboards_setup }

Os painéis têm um título, uma descrição e qualquer número de itens do painel. Acima do painel está a barra de painéis, que mostra todos os painéis disponíveis, um campo de pesquisa do painel e um botão ** + ** para criar um novo painel.

The Dashboards app has two modes: _view_ and _edit/create_. When you first log in
to DHIS2, your most recently used dashboard will be displayed in view mode, if you are on the same computer as you were previously. If you are using a different computer or browser, then the first starred dashboard will be displayed. If there are no starred dashboards, then the first dashboard (alphabetically) will be displayed. Starred dashboards always show first in the dashboard list.

Abaixo está um exemplo de um painel denominado "Antenatal Care", que foi preenchido com gráficos e mapas:

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-view-mode.png)

### Personalization { #personalization } 

O aplicativo Dashboards pode ser personalizado das seguintes maneiras:

- [Defina a altura da barra de painéis](#dashboards_personalize_bar)
- [Painéis com estrela para acesso rápido aos seus painéis favoritos](#dashboard-star-dashboard)
- [Mostrar ou ocultar a descrição do painel](# dashboard-show-description)

### Responsive view on small screens { #responsive-view-on-small-screens } 

Ao visualizar painéis em telas pequenas (por exemplo, orientação retrato em um telefone celular), o painel se adapta à tela e mostra todos os itens em uma única coluna. Algumas opções, incluindo edição, filtro e partilha, não estarão disponíveis.

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-small-screen.png)

### Searching for a dashboard { #searching-for-a-dashboard } 

Pode pesquisar um painel específico usando o campo de pesquisa no canto superior esquerdo da barra de painéis intitulado “Pesquisar um painel”. A pesquisa não diferencia maiúsculas de minúsculas e, conforme digita, a lista de painéis é reduzida para aqueles que correspondem ao texto da pesquisa.

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-search-for-dashboard.png)

### Personalização da altura da barra do painel { #dashboards_personalize_bar }

You can set a specific height for the dashboards bar by
down-clicking and dragging the bottom edge of the bar. When you finish dragging, the new height will be set. Clicking on the down arrow at the bottom of the dashboards bar will expand the bar to its maximum height (10 "rows"). Clicking on the up arrow will reset the height to your personalized height.

## Creating and editing a dashboard { #creating-and-editing-a-dashboard } 

Para criar um novo painel, clique no botão **+** no canto esquerdo da barra do painel para entrar no modo de criação/edição:

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-new-button.png)

Para editar um painel existente, clique no botão **Editar** ao lado do título do painel (deve ter acesso de edição para ver este botão):

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-title-bar.png)

No modo de criação/edição, pode adicionar ou alterar o título do painel, a descrição e os itens do painel. Se não adicionar um título, o painel será automaticamente intitulado "Painel sem título".

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-create-mode.png)

### Adicionando itens ao painel { #adding-items-to-the-dashboard } 

Adicione itens ao painel procurando por itens usando o seletor suspenso **Pesquisar itens para adicionar a este painel**. Os tipos de item são:

- Visualizações (gráficos e tabelas)
- Mapas
- Relatórios de eventos
- Gráficos de eventos
- Relatórios
- Recursos
- Apps
- Mensagens
- Caixas de texto
- Espaçadores

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-item-selector.png)

A lista de itens na lista suspensa exibe inicialmente 10 visualizações (gráficos e tabelas) e 5 de cada uma das outras categorias, com base no texto de pesquisa inserido. Mensagens (e-mail), caixas de texto e itens espaçadores também são encontrados na lista. Para ver mais itens, clique em **Mostrar mais**, e a lista desse tipo será estendida para 25 itens. Se ainda não encontrar o item que deseja, tente digitar um texto de pesquisa mais específico.

#### Dashboard layout and placement of new items { #dashboard-layout-and-placement-of-new-items } 

Ao adicionar itens ao painel, pode escolher um layout geral clicando no botão **Alterar layout**. Pode alterar essa configuração de layout a qualquer momento.

- Com o layout _Freeflow_, os itens adicionados podem ser movidos usando o mouse clicando no item e arrastando-o para a posição desejada. Os itens também podem ser redimensionados com o mouse clicando na alça de arrastar no canto inferior direito do item e arrastando para o tamanho desejado.
- Com o layout _Colunas fixas_, pode escolher o número de colunas que deseja ter no painel, e o painel será criado automaticamente. Os itens não podem ser movidos ou redimensionados no layout _Colunas fixas_.

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-layout-modal.png)

Também pode configurar se os itens recém-adicionados são colocados automaticamente no início ou no final do painel, escolhendo a opção desejada. Esta opção pode ser alterada a qualquer momento.

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-place-items.png)

#### Itens espaçadores { #spacer-items } 

Ao adicionar itens ao painel usando o layout _Freeflow_, eles irão "subir" até esbarrar em outro item. Para forçar o espaço vertical vazio entre os itens (como uma linha vazia), pode adicionar itens espaçadores ao painel. Eles são visíveis apenas no modo de edição/criação. No modo de visualização, eles não são exibidos, mas ocupam o espaço definido.

Espaçador em **modo de edição/criação**:

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-spacer-edit-mode.png)

Espaçador em **modo de visualização**:

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-spacer-view-mode.png)

#### Removendo itens { #removing-items } 

Remova itens clicando na lata de lixo vermelha no canto superior direito do item. Esteja ciente de que quando remove um item no layout _Freeflow_, os itens que estão posicionados abaixo do item removido irão "subir" para cima até que colidam com um item acima.

### Actions in create/edit mode { #actions-in-createedit-mode } 

No modo de criação/edição, verá os seguintes botões na barra de ações na parte superior da página: **Salvar alterações**, **Visualizar impressão**, **Configurações de filtro**, **Traduzir**, **Apagar** e **Sair sem salvar**. Os botões **Traduzir** e **Apagar** são exibidos apenas se estiver editando um painel existente.

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-edit-mode-actions.png)

### Salvando o painel { #saving-the-dashboard } 

Ao criar ou editar um painel, as alterações são salvas quando clica no botão **Salvar alterações**. Se não quiser salvar suas alterações, clique no botão **Sair sem salvar**. Em seguida, retornará ao modo de visualização com o painel que estava visualizando anteriormente.

### Print preview { #print-preview } 

Clique no botão **Visualizar impressão ** para ver a aparência do painel ao ser impresso com a [Opção de layout do painel](#dashboard-print-layout).

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-edit-print-preview.png)

Clique em **Sair da visualização de impressão** para retornar à edição do painel.

Observe que alguns itens podem ser movidos para a próxima página para evitar a divisão entre duas páginas. Os itens também podem ser encurtados para caber em uma página. Os itens encurtados mostram um ícone de informações no canto superior direito do item na visualização. O ícone de informações não é visível na impressão real.

### Restringindo filtros do painel { #restricting-dashboard-filters }

Por padrão, os utilizadores serão capazes de filtrar itens do painel por qualquer dimensão definida na instância DHIS2. As configurações de filtro do painel podem ser editadas para um painel clicando em **Configurações de filtro**.

Para restringir os filtros disponíveis, pode clicar em **Permitir apenas a filtro por dimensões selecionadas** e selecionar os filtros que deseja permitir no painel. O período e a unidade organizacional são selecionados por padrão, mas podem ser removidos, se desejado. Quando o painel é visualizado, os utilizadores só poderão escolher entre os filtros selecionados.

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-filter-settings.png)

Para salvar as atualizações nas configurações do filtro, precisa primeiro clicar em **Confirmar** para fechar a caixa de diálogo Configurações do filtro e, em seguida, clicar em **Salvar alterações** para salvar as alterações do painel.

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-save-changes.png)

### Tradução do título e da descrição do painel { #translating-dashboard-title-and-description } 

Se estiver editando um painel existente, haverá um botão **Traduzir**. Clique neste botão para abrir a caixa de diálogo Tradução, que fornece uma lista de idiomas para os quais traduzir e mostra o título do painel original abaixo do campo de entrada de nome. Primeiro escolha o idioma para o qual deseja traduzir e, em seguida, preencha o nome do painel e a tradução da descrição.

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-translation-dialog.png)

### Excluindo um painel { #deleting-a-dashboard } 

Se tiver acesso para apagar o painel, haverá um botão **Apagar**. Ao clicar no botão **Apagar**, uma caixa de diálogo de confirmação será exibida primeiro para confirmar que deseja excluir o painel.

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-confirm-delete.png)

## Visualizando um painel { #viewing-a-dashboard } 

No modo de visualização, pode alternar entre mostrar a descrição, marcar um painel com estrela, aplicar filtros, imprimir o painel, disponibilizar o painel offline e partilhar o painel com outros utilizadores e grupos de utilizadores.

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-more-menu.png)

### Mostrar descrição { #dashboard-show-description }

Para alternar a descrição, abra o menu **... Mais** e escolha **Mostrar descrição** (ou **Ocultar descrição**). Essa configuração será lembrada para todos os painéis que abrir. Esta configuração se aplica si, não a outros utilizadores.

### Painéis favoritos{ #dashboard-star-dashboard }

Seus painéis com estrela são listados primeiro na lista de painéis para acesso rápido. Para marcar um painel com estrela, clique no botão de estrela à direita do título. Também pode alternar a estrela no menu **... Mais**. Quando a estrela está “preenchida”, isso significa que o painel está marcado com uma estrela. A estrela de um painel se aplica apenas a si, não a outros utilizadores.

### Filtrando um painel { #filtering-a-dashboard } 

Aplicar filtros a um painel altera os dados exibidos nos itens do painel que contêm visualizações. Os filtros são aplicados a cada item do painel da mesma maneira: cada filtro adicionado substitui o valor original para aquela dimensão no gráfico, tabela ou mapa original. É possível filtrar por unidades organizacionais e períodos, bem como por dimensões dinâmicas, dependendo da instância do DHIS2. Pode aplicar vários filtros ao painel.

Para adicionar um filtro, clique no botão **Adicionar filtro** e escolha uma dimensão:

![Adicionando um filtro](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-filters.png)

Uma caixa de diálogo é aberta onde a seleção do filtro pode ser feita.

![Seleção de filtro de unidade organizacional](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-orgunit-filter-dialog.png)

Click on **Confirm** in the dialog to apply the filter to the
current dashboard.

Os filtros não são armazenados, portanto, ao alternar para um painel diferente, eles são redefinidos. Os emblemas de filtro pretos aparecem acima dos itens do painel para indicar quais filtros foram aplicados às visualizações do painel.

![Filtros atuais exibidos como emblemas acima do painel](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-filter-badges.png)

Pode editar um filtro clicando no ícone do filtro para abrir a caixa de diálogo de seleção de filtro. Um filtro pode ser removido clicando no botão **Remover** no emblema. Sempre que um filtro é adicionado, editado ou removido, os itens do painel são recarregados para mostrar os dados atualizados. Os emblemas do filtro estão sempre visíveis na parte superior da página ao rolar o conteúdo do painel.

Por padrão, os utilizadores podem filtrar itens do painel por qualquer dimensão definida na instância DHIS2. Para limitar os filtros disponíveis, consulte [Restringindo filtros do painel](#restting-dashboard-filters).

### Making dashboards available offline { #making-dashboards-available-offline } 

Para disponibilizar um painel offline, escolha a opção **Disponibilizar painel offline** no menu **... Mais**. Isso fará com que o painel de controle seja recarregado, onde as solicitações ao servidor são registradas e salvas no armazenamento do navegador. Observe que os painéis offline estão disponíveis apenas no computador e no navegador onde os definiu como offline. Se atualmente tem um filtro aplicado ao solicitar que o painel seja disponibilizado offline, uma caixa de diálogo aparecerá para confirmar a remoção dos filtros.

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-clear-filters-to-sync.png)

Os painéis que foram salvos para offline têm um indicador no chip do painel na barra de painéis, bem como uma tag que mostra a hora em que foi salvo.

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-offline-dashboard.png)

Se o painel foi alterado desde que o disponibilizou off-line, por si ou outra pessoa, precisará escolher **Sincronizar dados off-line agora** no menu **... Mais** para salvar a versão mais recente do painel.

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-sync-offline.png)

Pode remover um painel do armazenamento offline escolhendo **Remover do armazenamento offline** no menu **... Mais**.

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-remove-offline.png)

#### Other notes about Dashboards app when you are offline: { #other-notes-about-dashboards-app-when-you-are-offline } 

Se desconectar se manualmente da instância DHIS2, todos os painéis em cache serão limpos e não estarão mais disponíveis offline.

Se estiver offline, quaisquer botões ou ações que requeiram uma conexão para ser concluída com êxito serão desativados. Eles serão reativados assim que a conectividade for restaurada.

### Printing a dashboard { #printing-a-dashboard } 

No menu **... Mais**, pode imprimir o painel atual. Existem dois estilos de impressão do painel: _Layout do painel_ e _Um item por página_. Para ambos os estilos, é adicionada uma página de título que mostra o título do painel, a descrição (se a configuração _Mostrar descrição_ estiver ativada) e quaisquer filtros de painel aplicados.

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-print-menu.png)

Para melhores resultados de impressão:

- usar Chrome ou Edge
- espere até que todos os itens do painel sejam carregados antes de imprimir
- usar configuração paisagem A4 com margens padrão definidas e gráficos de fundo ativados

#### Layout do painel de impressão { #dashboard-print-layout }

_Dashboard layout_ print aproximar-se-á do layout do painel conforme mostrado no navegador. Observe que alguns ajustes podem precisar ser feitos no layout para evitar que os itens sejam divididos em várias páginas: os itens que seriam cortados por uma quebra de página são movidos para a próxima página e os itens mais altos do que uma página são encurtados para caber em uma página.

Uma vez no modo de impressão, clique no botão **Imprimir** no canto superior direito para acionar a funcionalidade de impressão do navegador.

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-print-layout.png)

#### Print one item per page { #print-one-item-per-page } 

Este estilo de impressão imprimirá cada item do painel em uma página separada, maximizando o uso do tamanho do papel.

Clique no botão **Imprimir** no canto superior direito para acionar a funcionalidade de impressão do navegador.

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-print-oipp.png)

## Dashboard items with charts, pivot tables or maps { #dashboard-items-with-charts-pivot-tables-or-maps } 

Os itens do painel com gráficos, tabela dinâmica ou mapas podem ter um botão de menu de item no canto superior direito do item com opções de visualização adicionais, dependendo das configurações do sistema que foram definidas para a instância DHIS2. Se todas as configurações relevantes do sistema foram desabilitadas pela instância DHIS2, então não haverá um botão de menu de item. Aqui estão as opções de menu de itens possíveis:

### Alternando entre visualizações { #switching-between-visualizations } 

É possível alternar a visualização de visualização para itens que contêm gráficos, tabelas dinâmicas e mapas. Clique no botão do menu do item e escolha a visualização desejada (por exemplo, **Visualizar como tabela**, **Visualizar como mapa**, **Visualizar como gráfico**):

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-item-menu.png)

### View item in fullscreen { #view-item-in-fullscreen } 

Para visualizar o gráfico, tabela ou mapa em tela cheia, clique na opção ** Ver tela cheia **. Para sair da tela inteira, pode pressionar a tecla **esc** ou clicar no botão de saída no canto superior direito da visualização em tela inteira.

### Open in app { #open-in-app } 

Para abrir a visualização em seu aplicativo correspondente (por exemplo, Data Visualizer, Maps), clique na opção **Abrir no aplicativo [nome do aplicativo]**.

### Show interpretations and details { #show-interpretations-and-details } 

Pode escrever interpretações para o gráfico, tabela dinâmica, mapa, relatório de evento e itens do gráfico de evento clicando em **Mostrar interpretações e detalhes**:

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-item-menu-interpretations.png)

O item será expandido verticalmente por baixo para mostrar a descrição, interpretações e respostas. Pode gostar de uma interpretação, responder a uma interpretação e adicionar sua própria interpretação. Pode editar, partilhar ou excluir suas próprias interpretações e respostas e, se tiver acesso de moderador, pode excluir as interpretações de outras pessoas.

É possível formatar o campo de descrição e as interpretações com **negrito**, _itálico_ usando os marcadores de estilo Markdown \* e \_ para **negrito** e _itálico_ respectivamente. O campo de texto para escrever novas interpretações possui uma barra de ferramentas para adicionar rich text. Atalhos de teclado também estão disponíveis: Ctrl/Cmd + B e Ctrl/Cmd + I. Um conjunto limitado de smilies é compatível e pode ser usado digitando uma das seguintes combinações de caracteres: :) :-) :( :-(: +1: -1. Os URLs são detectados automaticamente e convertidos em um link clicável.

As interpretações são classificadas em ordem decrescente por data, com a mais recente exibida no topo. As respostas de interpretação são classificadas em ordem crescente por data, com a mais antiga exibida no topo.

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-interpretations.png)

## Partilhando um painel { #dashboard_sharing }

Para partilhar um painel com utilizadores e grupos de utilizadores, clique no botão **Partilhar** à direita do título do painel para exibir a caixa de diálogo _Partilha e acesso_.

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-sharing-dialog.png)

Existem três níveis de permissões de partilha disponíveis para um painel:

- Sem acesso

  O utilizador ou grupo de utilizadores não pode visualizar ou editar o painel. Se eles tentarem acessar o painel com a url, o aplicativo Painéis exibirá a mensagem "Painel solicitado não encontrado".

- Apenas ver

  O utilizador ou grupo de utilizadores pode visualizar o painel, mas não pode editá-lo.

- Ver e editar

  O utilizador ou grupo de utilizadores pode visualizar e editar o painel. Este nível de partilha permite todos os tipos de mudanças, incluindo alterar o layout, redimensionar e remover itens, renomear e excluir o painel, etc.

Todos os painéis têm o grupo _Todos os utilizadores_ definido como **Sem acesso** por padrão. O grupo _Todos os utilizadores_ inclui todos os utilizadores conectados.

### Add users and user groups { #add-users-and-user-groups } 

Para partilhar um painel com utilizadores e grupos de utilizadores específicos, digite o nome no campo de entrada, escolha o nível de acesso desejado e clique em **Dar acesso**.

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-sharing-add-user.png)

Pode fornecer aos utilizadores a url do painel, permitindo que naveguem diretamente para o painel. Para obter o url do painel, basta abrir o painel no modo de visualização e copiar o url do navegador. Por exemplo, o url para o painel de Cuidados Pré-natais em play.dhis2.org/dev é:

https://play.dhis2.org/dev/dhis-web-dashboard/#/nghVC4wtyzi

### Cascade sharing of visualizations on the dashboard { #cascade-sharing-of-visualizations-on-the-dashboard } 

Para garantir que todos os gráficos, mapas e tabelas no painel sejam partilhados com os utilizadores e grupos de utilizadores escolhidos, clique no botão **Aplicar partilha aos itens do painel**.

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-sharing-cascade-sharing.png)



# Usando o aplicativo Data Visualizer { #data_visualizer } 

![](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-overview.png)

## Criação e edição de visualizações { #creating-and-editing-visualizations } 

Ao abrir o aplicativo visualizador de dados a partir do menu dhis2, verá uma tela em branco e poderá começar a criar sua visualização imediatamente.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-new.png)

### Selecione o tipo de visualização { #select-visualization-type } 

Select the desired visualization type from the selector in the upper left corner.
For each visualization type there is a brief description with suggestions about where to use the main dimensions in the layout.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-visualization-type.png)


|Tipo de visualização|Descrição|
|--- |--- |
|Coluna|Exibe informações como colunas retangulares verticais com comprimentos proporcionais aos valores que representam. <br> <br> Exemplo: comparar o desempenho de diferentes distritos. <br> <br> Restrições de layout: exatamente 1 dimensão como série, exatamente 1 dimensão como categoria.|
|Coluna empilhada|Exibe informações como colunas retangulares verticais, onde as barras que representam várias categorias são empilhadas umas sobre as outras. <br> <br> Exemplo: exibindo tendências ou somas de elementos de dados relacionados. <br> <br> Restrições de layout: o mesmo que Coluna.|
|Barra|Igual a coluna, apenas com barras horizontais.|
|Barra Empilhada|Igual à coluna empilhada, apenas com barras horizontais.|
|Linha|Exibe informações como uma série de pontos conectados por linhas retas. Também conhecido como série temporal. <br> <br> Exemplo: visualização de tendências nos dados do indicador em intervalos de tempo. <br> <br> Restrições de layout: o mesmo que Coluna.|
|Área|É baseado em uma linha (acima), com o espaço entre o eixo e a linha preenchido com cores e as linhas empilhadas umas sobre as outras. <br> <br> Exemplo: comparar as tendências de indicadores relacionados. <br> <br> Restrições de layout: o mesmo que Coluna.|
|Área empilhada|O mesmo que Área, mas as áreas dos vários itens de dimensão são empilhadas umas sobre as outras. <br> <br> Exemplo: comparar as tendências de indicadores relacionados. <br> <br> Restrições de layout: o mesmo que Área.|
|Torta|Círculo dividido em setores (ou fatias). <br> <br> Exemplo: visualizar a proporção de dados para elementos de dados individuais em comparação com a soma total de todos os elementos de dados. <br> <br> Restrições de layout: exatamente 1 dimensão como série, não tem categoria.|
|Radar|Exibe dados em eixos começando do mesmo ponto. Também conhecido como gráfico de aranha. <br> <br> Restrições de layout: o mesmo que Coluna.|
|Medidor|Semicírculo que exibe um único valor, normalmente de 100% (os valores inicial e final são configuráveis). <br> <br> Restrições de layout: exatamente 1 dimensão com exatamente 1 item como série, dimensão de dados é bloqueada para série.|
|Ano após ano (linha)|Útil quando deseja comparar um ano de dados com outros anos de dados. Com base em anos civis. <br> <br> Restrições de layout: a dimensão do período está desabilitada.|
|Ano após ano (coluna)|O mesmo que Ano após ano (linha), apenas com colunas.|
|Valor unico|Displays a single value in a dashboard friendly way. If the dimension displayed has an indicator type assigned, a % symbol or a string (per thousand, per hundred thousand, etc...) is appended to the value.<br><br>Layout restrictions: same as Gauge.|
|Tabela Dinâmica|Resume os dados de uma tabela mais extensa e pode incluir somas, médias ou outras estatísticas, que a tabela dinâmica agrupa de maneira significativa. <br> <br> Restrições de layout: nenhum.|
|Scatter|Os gráficos de dispersão permitem que os utilizadores registrem unidades organizacionais como pontos em relação a duas variáveis para um único período fixo ou relativo. <br> <br> Restrições de layout: exatamente 1 item cada como vertical e horizontal, a dimensão dos dados está bloqueada para vertical e horizontal, a unidade de organização está bloqueada para pontos.|

### Select dimensions { #select-dimensions } 

No menu de dimensões à esquerda, pode selecionar as dimensões que deseja mostrar em sua visualização, incluindo dados, período, unidades de organização e dimensões dinâmicas. Eles podem ser adicionados ao clicar em uma dimensão, arrastar e soltar uma dimensão na área de layout ou ao passar o cursor sobre uma dimensão e usando em seu menu de contexto (três pontos).

![](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-dimensions.png)

Assim como no menu de dimensões, na área de layout também pode alterar as seleções ao clicar em uma dimensão, arrastar e soltar uma dimensão ou ao usar o menu de contexto de uma dimensão (três pontos).

![](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-layout-area.png)

- **Series**: A series is a set of continuous, related elements (for
  example periods or data elements) that you want to visualize in
  order to emphasize trends or relations in its data. Also known as Columns for Pivot table visualizations.

<!-- end list -->

- **Categories**: A category is a set of elements (for example indicators
  or organisation units) for which you want to compare its data. Also known as Rows for Pivot table visualizations.

<!-- end list -->

- **Filter**: The filter selection will filter the data displayed in the
  visualization. Note that if you use the data dimension as filter, you can
  only specify a single indicator or data set as filter item, whereas
  with other dimension types you can select any number of items.

### Selecione os itens de dimensão { #data_vis_select_dim_items } 

Uma dimensão refere-se aos elementos que descrevem os valores dos dados no sistema. Existem três dimensões principais no sistema:

- **Data**: Includes data elements, indicators and datasets (reporting
  rates), describing the phenomena or event of the data.

<!-- end list -->

- **Períodos**: descreve quando o evento ocorreu.

<!-- end list -->

- **Unidades de organização**: Descreve onde o evento ocorreu.

O Visualizador de dados é altamente flexível em termos de permitir que use essas dimensões como séries, categorias e filtro.

Para selecionar itens para uma dimensão, abra a janela modal da dimensão ao clicar em uma dimensão. Esta janela também será aberta automaticamente ao adicionar uma dimensão sem itens selecionados ao layout. Selecione quais itens adicionar à visualização ao clicar duas vezes em um item ou ao seleccionar um item com um único clique e usando as setas no meio. A ordem de apresentação será a mesma em que foram selecionados. Os itens selecionados podem ser reordenados arrastando-os e soltando-os na seção Selecionados.

#### Select data items { #select-data-items } 

Ao selecionar itens de dados, existem diferentes maneiras de filtrar os itens exibidos. Ao usar o campo de pesquisa na parte superior, uma pesquisa global por nome de item é realizada no **Tipo de dado** atualmente selecionado. Ao selecionar um **Tipo de dado** no menu suspenso, os itens podem ser filtrados por tipo e subtipo, onde o subtipo disponível depende do tipo de dados selecionado. A pesquisa de nome e a filtragem de tipo/subtipo também podem ser combinadas para um filtro mais detalhado. O tipo de cada item exibido é indicado por um ícone correspondente no item. Ao passar o mouse sobre um item, o nome do tipo também pode ser visualizado.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-dimension-modal.png)

#### Select periods { #select-periods } 

Ao selecionar um período, tem a opção de escolher entre períodos fixos e períodos relativos. Eles também podem ser combinados. Os períodos sobrepostos são filtrados para que apareçam apenas uma vez. Para períodos relativos, os nomes são relativos à data atual, por exemplo, se o mês atual for março e **Último mês** for selecionado, o mês de fevereiro será mostrado na visualização.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-period-dimension-modal.png)

#### Selecione as unidades de organização { #select-organisation-units } 

O diálogo das unidades de organização é flexível, ao oferecer essencialmente três maneiras de selecionar unidades de organização:

- Seleção explícita: Use a **árvore** para selecionar explicitamente as unidades de organização que deseja que apareçam na visualização. Se clicar com o botão direito do mouse em uma unidade organizacional, poderá facilmente escolher selecionar todas as unidades organizacionais abaixo dela.

- Níveis e grupos: os menus suspensos **Nível** e **Grupo** são uma maneira conveniente de selecionar todas as unidades em um ou mais grupos de unidades organizacionais ou em níveis específicos. Exemplo: selecione _Chiefdom_ (nível 3) para obter todas as unidades organizacionais nesse nível.

  Observe que, assim que pelo menos um nível ou grupo for selecionado, a árvore da unidade organizacional agora atua como o limite para os níveis/grupos. Exemplo: se selecionar _Chiefdom_ (nível 3) e unidade organizacional _Kailahun_ (no nível 2) na árvore, obterá todas as unidades dentro do distrito Kailahun.

- As unidades de organização do utilizador:

  - Unidade organizacional do utilizador: esta é uma forma de selecionar dinamicamente as unidades organizacionais às quais o utilizador conectado está associado.

  - Sub-unidades do utilizador: Seleciona as sub-unidades da unidade de organização do utilizador.

  - Unidades sub-x2 do utilizador: Seleciona as unidades dois níveis abaixo da unidade de organização do utilizador.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-organisation-unit-dimension-modal.png)

#### Select dynamic dimensions { #select-dynamic-dimensions } 

When selecting a dynamic dimension, either individual or all items can be selected. By default, the **Manually select items** option is selected, which allows for individual items to be picked out of a list, similar to how the **Data** and **Period** dimensions are selected above.
To automatically select all items for a dimension, the **Automatically include all items** option can be selected. This will also include any additional items that are added in the future if the available dimension items are updated.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-dynamic-dimension-modal.png)

### Two category charts { #two-category-charts } 

Most chart visualization types can show two categories.
Switching from Pivot Table to Column, Bar, Area (and their stacked versions) and Line is keeping the first two dimensions in Category, any additional dimension is moved to Filter.
The labels for the first dimension in Category are shown at the top of the chart, and the ones for the second dimension at the bottom.
The resulting visualization is composed of separate charts, one for each item in the first dimension.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-two-category.png)

## Change the display of your visualization { #change-the-display-of-your-visualization } 

A exibição de uma visualização pode ser alterada ao ativar/desativar e ao configurar várias opções. Cada tipo de visualização pode ter um conjunto diferente de opções disponíveis. As opções são organizadas em guias na **caixa de diálogo Opções** e em seções dentro de cada guia.

1.  Clique em **Opções** para abrir a **caixa de diálogo Opções**.

2.  Navegue pelas abas na caixa de diálogo para ver as opções disponíveis.

3.  Configure as opções desejadas conforme necessário.

4.  Clique em **Atualizar** para aplicar as alterações à visualização.

### List of available options { #list-of-available-options } 

|Opção|Descrição|
|--- |--- |
||**Aba Dados**|
|Tipo de agregação|Define como os elementos de dados ou indicadores serão agregados na visualização. Alguns dos tipos de agregação são Por elemento de dados, Contagem, Mínimo e Máx.|
|Linha de base|Exibe uma linha horizontal no valor de domínio fornecido. Útil, por exemplo, quando deseja visualizar como seu desempenho evoluiu desde o início de um processo.|
|Subtotais da coluna|Exibe subtotais em uma tabela dinâmica para cada dimensão. <br> Se selecionar apenas uma dimensão, os subtotais serão ocultados para essas colunas. Isso ocorre porque os valores serão iguais aos subtotais.|
|Totais da coluna|Exibe os valores totais em uma tabela dinâmica para cada coluna, bem como um total de todos os valores na tabela.|
|Valores cumulativos|Exibe valores cumulativos em visualizações de coluna, coluna empilhada, barra, barra empilhada, linha e área|
|Ordem de classificação personalizada|Controla a ordem de classificação dos valores.|
|Rótulos de dimensão|Mostra os nomes das dimensões como parte de uma tabela dinâmica.|
|Esconder categorias vazias|Oculta os itens da categoria sem dados da visualização. <br> **Antes do primeiro**: oculta os valores ausentes apenas antes do primeiro valor <br> **Depois do último**: oculta os valores ausentes apenas após o último valor <br> **Antes do primeiro e depois do último**: oculta os valores ausentes apenas antes do primeiro valor e após o último valor <br> **Todos**: oculta todos os valores ausentes <br> Isso é útil, por exemplo, quando cria visualizações de coluna e barra.|
|Esconder colunas vazias|Oculta colunas vazias de uma tabela dinâmica. Isso é útil quando olha para tabelas grandes onde uma grande parte dos itens de dimensão não tem dados para manter a tabela mais legível.|
|Esconder as linhas vazias|Oculta linhas vazias de uma tabela dinâmica. Isso é útil quando olha para tabelas grandes onde uma grande parte dos itens de dimensão não tem dados para manter a tabela mais legível.|
|Tipo de número|Define o tipo de valor que deseja exibir em uma tabela dinâmica: Valor, Percentagem de linha ou Percentagem de coluna. <br> As opções Percentagem da linha e Percentagem da coluna significam que exibirá os valores como percentagens do total da linha ou porcentagem do total da coluna em vez do valor agregado. Isso é útil quando você deseja ver a contribuição dos elementos de dados, categorias ou unidades de organização para o valor total.|
|Incluir apenas eventos concluídos|Inclui apenas eventos concluídos no processo de agregação. Isso é útil, por exemplo, para excluir eventos parciais nos cálculos do indicador.|
|Subtotais de linha|Exibe subtotais em uma tabela dinâmica para cada dimensão. <br> Se selecionar apenas uma dimensão, os subtotais serão ocultados para essas linhas. Isso ocorre porque os valores serão iguais aos subtotais.|
|Totais de linha|Exibe os valores totais em uma tabela dinâmica para cada linha, bem como um total de todos os valores na tabela.|
|Pular arredondamento|Ignora o arredondamento dos valores dos dados, oferecendo a precisão total dos valores dos dados. Pode ser útil para dados financeiros em que o valor total em dólares é necessário.|
|Valores empilhados somam 100%|Exibe valores 100% empilhados em colunas empilhadas e visualizações de barra empilhadas.|
|Linha alvo|Exibe uma linha horizontal no valor de domínio fornecido. Útil, por exemplo, quando deseja comparar seu desempenho com a meta atual.|
|Linha de tendência|Exibe a linha de tendência que visualiza como seus dados evoluem ao longo do tempo. Por exemplo, se o desempenho está a melhorar ou a piorar. Útil quando os períodos são selecionados como categoria.|
|Rótulos de valor|Mostra os valores acima da série na visualização.|
||Aba Eixos|
|Alcance do eixo|Define o valor máximo e mínimo que será visível no eixo do intervalo.|
|Título do eixo|Digite um título aqui para exibir um rótulo próximo ao eixo x ou y. Útil quando deseja fornecer informações de contexto para a visualização, por exemplo, sobre a unidade de medida. <br> `Gerado automaticamente a partir de itens do eixo` fornece um título baseado no conteúdo do eixo. <br> Nenhum remove o título. <br> `Personalizado` permite que digite um título personalizado.|
|Decimais|Define o número de decimais que serão usados para os valores do eixo do intervalo.|
|Passos|Define o número de tiques que ficarão visíveis no eixo do intervalo.|
||**Guia Legenda**|
|Use a legenda para as cores do gráfico|Aplica uma legenda aos itens de visualização, que é uma cor baseada em valor para cada item. As próprias legendas são configuradas no `app de manutenção`.
|Tipo de legenda| Controla qual legenda é aplicada. <br> `Usar legenda predefinida por item de dados` aplica uma legenda a cada elemento de dados ou indicador individualmente, com base na legenda atribuída a cada um no` aplicativo de manutenção`. <br> `Selecionar uma única legenda para visualização inteira` aplica uma única legenda a todos os itens de dados, escolhidos em uma lista suspensa de legendas disponíveis.
|Estilo lenda| Controla onde a cor da legenda é aplicada, seja ao texto ou ao fundo. Pode usar esta opção para scorecards para identificar valores altos e baixos rapidamente. Não aplicável para visualizações de `Valor Único`,` Coluna` ou `Barra`.|
|Mostrar chave da legenda|Displays a key for the legend on the right side of the visualization, to indicate the value ranges and their respective color. If the visualization is added to a dashboard, this option can also be toggled from the top right corner of the dashboard item. 
||**Aba Série**|
||As opções para adicionar mais eixos e alterar a forma como as diferentes séries são exibidas são definidas nesta guia. Por favor, veja uma descrição detalhada de como isso funciona nas seções correspondentes abaixo.|
||**Aba de estilo**|
|Separador de grupo de dígitos|Controla qual caractere usar para separar grupos de dígitos ou "milhares". Pode definir como Vírgula, Espaço ou Nenhum.|
|Densidade de exibição|Controla o tamanho das células em uma tabela dinâmica. Pode definir como Confortável, Normal ou Compacto. <br> Compact é útil quando deseja ajustar tabelas grandes na tela do navegador.|
|Exibir hierarquia da unidade organizacional|Mostra o de todos os ancestrais das unidades de organização, por exemplo "Serra Leoa / Bombali / Tamabaka / Sanya CHP" para "Sanya CHP". <br> As unidades organizacionais são então classificadas em ordem alfabética, o que ordenará as unidades organizacionais de acordo com a hierarquia. <br> Quando descarrega de uma tabela dinâmica com unidades de organização como linhas e seleciona Exibir hierarquia de unidade de organização, cada nível de unidade de organização é renderizado como uma coluna separada. Isso é útil, por exemplo, quando cria tabelas dinâmicas do Excel em um computador local.|
|Fix column headers to top of table|Freezes row headers in Pivot Tables so they are always visible when scrolling the table content.|
|Fix row headers to left of table|Freezes column headers in Pivot Tables so they are always visible when scrolling the table content.|
|Tamanho da fonte|Controla o tamanho de uma fonte de texto da tabela dinâmica. Pode definir como Grande, Normal ou Pequeno.|
|Título do gráfico/tabela|Controla o título que aparece acima da visualização. <br> `Gerado automaticamente` usa o título padrão gerado a partir das dimensões / filtros da visualização. <br> Nenhum remove o título. <br> `Personalizado` permite que digite um título personalizado.|
|Subtítulo do gráfico/tabela|Controla a legenda que aparece acima da visualização. <br> `Gerado automaticamente` usa a legenda padrão gerada a partir das dimensões/filtros da visualização. <br> Nenhum remove a legenda. <br> `Personalizado` permite que digite uma legenda personalizada.|
|Mostrar chave da legenda|Ativa e desativa a legenda, deixando mais espaço para a própria visualização.|
|Sem espaço entre barras/colunas|Remove o espaço entre as colunas ou barras na visualização. Útil para exibir a visualização como uma curva EPI.|
|Rótulos de valor|Mostra os valores acima da série na visualização.|
|Conjunto de cores|Controla as cores usadas no gráfico. Uma lista de conjuntos de cores disponíveis é exibida com uma prévia das cores. Também existe a opção "Padrões monocromáticos" que usa padrões coloridos em vez de cores sólidas.|
||**Guia de valores limite**|
|Limite de valores mínimo/máximo|Permite que os dados sejam filtrados no lado do servidor. <br> Pode instruir o sistema a retornar apenas os registros onde o valor dos dados agregados é igual, maior que, maior ou igual, menor ou menor ou igual a certos valores. <br> Se ambas as partes do filtro forem usadas, é possível filtrar um intervalo de registros de dados.|
||**Guia Parâmetros**|
|Ordem de classificação personalizada|Controla a ordem de classificação dos valores.|
|Incluir cumulativo|Inclui uma coluna com valores cumulativos para uma tabela dinâmica.|
|Incluir regressão|Inclui uma coluna com valores de regressão para uma tabela dinâmica.|
|Unidade organizacional|Controla se deve pedir ao utilizadores para entrar em uma unidade organizacional ao criar um relatório padrão no aplicativo Relatórios.|
|Unidade de organização mãe|Controla se deve pedir ao utilizador para entrar em uma unidade de organização pai ao criar um relatório padrão no aplicativo Relatórios.|
|Período de relatório|Controla se deve pedir ao utilizador para inserir um período de relatório ao criar um relatório padrão no aplicativo Relatórios.|
|Limite superior|Controla o número máximo de linhas a serem incluídas em uma tabela dinâmica.|
||**Aba Outliers**|
|Método de detecção de outlier|A análise de outlier é um processo que envolve a identificação de observações anómalas em um conjunto de dados. No Visualizador de dados, os valores discrepantes são detectados primeiro ao normalizar os dados em uma linha de regressão linear e, em seguida, ao analisar a distância de cada ponto da linha de regressão. Atualmente, três métodos são suportados. **Intervalo interquartil (IQR)** é baseado na divisão de um conjunto de dados em quartis, enquanto **Pontuação z modificada** é baseada no Desvio Mediano Absoluto (MAD). IQR e MAD são considerados as duas medidas robustas de escala mais comuns. **O escore z padrão** é baseado no desvio padrão e, portanto, é considerado menos robusto, pois é muito influenciado por outliers.|
|Fator de limiar|O número pelo qual os limites outlier são multiplicados. Controla a sensibilidade da faixa de limite. Os fatores padrão são 1,5 para IQR e 3 para z-scores.|

### Custom styling for text and series key in charts { #custom-styling-for-text-and-series-key-in-charts } 

The following options can be customized using the text styling tool: `Chart title`, `Chart subtitle`, `Show series key`, `Target line`, `Base line`, `Axis title` and `Labels` for both horizontal and vertical axes.
The text styling tool allows to choose a font size, color and italic/bold variants. It's also possible to choose the position of the text.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-text-styling-tool.png)

## Adicionando categorias atribuídas { #adding-assigned-categories } 

Categorias atribuídas é uma dimensão composta que representa combinações de opções de categorias associadas à combinação de categorias do elemento de dados selecionado. Isso pode ser adicionado ao arrastar a dimensão **Categorias atribuídas** do menu de dimensões do lado esquerdo e para o layout de visualização:

![](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-assigned-categories.png)

Outra maneira de adicionar categorias atribuídas é aceder a opção **Adicionar categorias atribuída ** no menu de contexto da dimensão `Dados` (não disponível para` Medidor`, `Ano após ano` ou` Valor único`).

## Adicionando mais eixos { #adding-more-axes } 

Ao combinar dados com diferentes escalas de medição, obterá uma visualização mais significativa por ter mais de um eixo. Para `Coluna`,` Barra`, `Área` e` Linha` pode fazer isso ao clicar na guia ** Série ** na caixa de diálogo `Opções`. Se a opção estiver desabilitada, certifique-se de que a dimensão `Dados` está no eixo` Série` e que pelo menos dois itens foram adicionados.

Four axes are available, two on the left side (axis 1 and 3) of the chart and two on the right side (axis 2 and 4).
Each axis has a different color and the chart items are going to be colored accordingly.

> **Nota**
>
> Quando vários eixos estão em uso, a opção `Color set` na guia` Style` será desabilitada. As opções `Linha de destino` e` Linha de base` estão disponíveis na guia `Eixos` por eixo.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-series-tab-multi-axis.png)

## Using multiple visualization types { #using-multiple-visualization-types } 

É possível combinar um gráfico `Coluna` com itens` Linha` e vice-versa. Isso é feito ao clicar na guia ** Série ** na caixa de diálogo `Opções` e ao alterar o` Tipo de visualização`. Isso também pode ser combinado com o uso de vários eixos (conforme descrito na seção acima).

![](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-series-tab-multi-axis-multi-type.png)

Isso resulta em um gráfico que combina os tipos `Coluna` e` Linha`.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-multi-type-chart.png)

## Data drilling { #data-drilling } 

Este recurso está habilitado para os tipos de visualização `Tabela dinâmica`,` Coluna`, `Coluna empilhada`,` Bar` e `Barra empilhada` e permite detalhar os dados ao clicar em uma célula / coluna / barra de valor na visualização . Um menu contextual é aberto com várias opções.

Pode pesquisar os dados por unidade organizacional, o que significa navegar para cima e para baixo na árvore da unidade organizacional. A análise de dados afeta a seleção de dimensão atual na área de layout. A dimensão da unidade de organização deve, portanto, estar presente no eixo Colunas / Série ou no eixo Linhas / Categoria para que o recurso de perfuração seja ativado.

![Data drilling in a pivot table](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-pt-drill.png)

![Data drilling no gráfico de colunas](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-column-drill.png)

## Gerenciar visualizações salvas { #manage-saved-visualizations } 

Salvar suas visualizações torna mais fácil encontrá-las mais tarde. Também pode optar por partilhá-los com outros utilizadores ou exibi-los em um painel.

### Abra uma visualização { #open-a-visualization } 

1.  Clique em **Arquivo** \> **Abrir**.

2.  Digite o nome de uma visualização no campo de pesquisa ou clique nas setas ** <** and **> ** para navegar entre as diferentes páginas. O resultado também pode ser filtrado por tipo e proprietário ao usar os menus correspondentes no canto superior direito.

3.  Clique no nome do que deseja abrir.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-open-dialog.png)

### Salvar uma visualização { #save-a-visualization } 

1. a) Clique em **Arquivo** \> **Salvar**.

2. Insira um **Nome** e uma **Descrição** para sua visualização.

3. Clique em **Salvar**.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-save-dialog.png)

### Renomear uma visualização { #rename-a-visualization } 

1.  Clique em **Arquivo** \> **Renomear**.

2.  Insira o novo nome e/ou descrição.

3.  Clique em **Renomear**.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-rename-dialog.png)

### Excluir uma visualização { #delete-a-visualization } 

1.  Clique em **Arquivo** \> **Excluir**.

2.  Clique em **Excluir**.

### Obtenha o link para a visualização { #get-the-link-to-the-visualization } 

1. Clique em **Arquivo** \> **Obter link**.

2. O URL pode ser copiado por meio do menu de contexto do navegador que abre ao clicar com o botão direito do mouse no link.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-delete-dialog.png)

## Interpretações de visualização { #visualization-interpretations } 

Ao verificar uma visualização salva, pode expandir as interpretações no lado direito, ao clicar no botão Interpretações no canto superior direito. A descrição da visualização também será mostrada. A descrição é compatível com o formato rich text.

Novas interpretações podem ser adicionadas ao digitar no campo de texto no canto inferior direito. Outros utilizadores podem ser mencionados com `@ username`. Comece por digitar `@` mais as primeiras letras do nome de utilizador ou nome real e uma lista de utilizadores correspondentes será exibida. Os utilizadores mencionados receberão uma mensagem DHIS2 interna com a interpretação ou comentário. As interpretações também podem ser vistas no aplicativo **Dashboard**.

É possível formatar o texto com **negrito**, _itálico_ ao usar os marcadores de estilo Markdown `*` e `_` para **negrito** e _itálico_ respectivamente (atalhos de teclado também estão disponíveis:` Ctrl` / `Cmd `+` B` e `Ctrl` /` Cmd` + `I`). Um conjunto limitado de emojis é suportado e pode ser usado ao digitar uma das seguintes combinações de caracteres: `:)` `:-)` `: (` `:-(` `: + 1``: -1`. URLs são detectados automaticamente e convertidos em um link clicável.

Para visualizar a visualização de acordo com a data de uma determinada interpretação, clique na interpretação ou no botão `Visualizar`. Isso irá regenerar a visualização com a data relevante, que é indicada ao lado do título da visualização. Clicar em `Voltar para todas as interpretações` irá regenerar a visualização com a data atual.

Para assinar a visualização salva, clique no ícone de sino no canto superior direito. Receberá mensagens internas sempre que outro utilizador gostar/criar/atualizar uma interpretação nesta visualização salva.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-view-interpretation.png)

## Compartilhe uma visualização { #share-a-visualization } 

As configurações de partilha podem ser acedidos ao clicar em **Arquivo** \> **Partilhar**. Altere as configurações de partilha para os grupos de utilizadores que deseja modificar, as configurações disponíveis são:

- **Pode editar e visualizar**: Pode visualizar e editar a visualização.

- **Pode visualizar apenas**: só pode visualizar a visualização.

- **Sem acesso**: Não terá acesso à visualização. Esta configuração é aplicável apenas para **Acesso público** e **Acesso externo**. (Observe que para permitir o acesso a todos, **Acesso público** e **Acesso externo** devem ser definidos para permitir a visualização.)

Novos utilizadores podem ser adicionados procurando-os pelo nome em `Adicionar utilizadores e grupos de utilizadores`.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-share-dialog.png)

## Download { #download } 

As visualizações podem ser baixadas ao usar o menu **Descarregar**. Todos os tipos de visualização suportam descarregar `Graphics` e` Plain data source`, exceto o tipo `Pivot table`, que pode ser baixado como` Table layout` e `Plain data source`.

### Download de `gráficos` { #graphics-download } 

Descarregar um arquivo de imagem (.png) ou PDF (.pdf) para o seu computador.

### Download do `Layout da tabela` { #table-layout-download } 

Descarregar um arquivo Excel (.xls), CSV (.csv) ou HTML (.html) para o seu computador.

### Download de `fonte de dados simples` { #plain-data-source-download } 

You can download the data source of a visualization in JSON, XML, Excel,
CSV, JXRML or Raw data SQL formats with different identification schemes
(ID, Code, and Name). The data document uses identifiers of the
dimension items and opens in a new browser window to display the URL of
the request to the Web API in the address bar. This is useful for
developers of apps and other client modules based on the DHIS2 Web API
or for those who require a plan data source, for instance for import
into statistical packages.

**Formatos disponíveis**

|Formato|Açao|Descrição|
|--- |--- |------ |
|JSON|Clique em JSON|Baixa o formato JSON com base na propriedade ID, Código ou Nome.|
|XML|Clique em XML|Descarregar no formato XML com base na propriedade ID, Código ou Nome.|
|Microsoft Excel|Clique em Microsoft Excel|Descarregar no formato Microsoft Excel com base na propriedade ID, Código ou Nome.|
|CSV|Clique em CSV|Descarregar no formato CSV com base na propriedade ID, Código ou Nome.|
|Conjunto de valores de dados XML|Clique em Avançado> XML|Faz o download dos valores de dados brutos como XML, em oposição aos dados que foram agregados ao longo de várias dimensões.|
|Conjunto de valores de dados JSON|Clique em Avançado> JSON|Descarregar valores de dados brutos como JSON, ao contrário dos dados que foram agregados ao longo de várias dimensões.|
|JRXML|Clique em Avançado> JRXML|Produz um modelo de Relatório Jasper que pode ser ainda mais personalizado com base em suas necessidades exatas e usado como base para um relatório padrão no DHIS 2.|
|SQL de dados brutos|Clique em Avançado> SQL de dados brutos|Fornece a instrução SQL real usada para gerar a visualização de dados. Pode usá-lo como uma fonte de dados em um relatório Jasper ou como base para uma exibição SQL.|


## Veja a visualização como um mapa { #see-visualization-as-map } 

Para ver como uma visualização ficaria no mapa, selecione o tipo de visualização `Abrir como mapa` após terminar de construir sua visualização.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-open-as-map.png)



# Using the Line Listing app { #using-the-line-listing-app } 

The Line Listing app is a new app that replaces the line listing functionality in the Event Reports app, but also offers additional functionality.

> **NOTE**
>
> There will be a forward compatibility with the Event Reports app, which means that you can open the existing event reports of type line list in the Line Listing app, but you cannot save changes to them in the Line Listing app.

### Creating and editing a line list { #creating-and-editing-a-line-list } 

When you open the Line Listing app from the DHIS2 menu, you are presented with a blank slate, and you can start creating a line list.

![](resources/images/image5.png)

## Creating a line list { #creating-a-line-list } 

### Line list { #line-list } 

In the Line Listing app, you currently only have one type of selection which is Line list.

![](resources/images/image24.png)

### Input { #input } 

(_This is the same as you see in the Event Reports app_). When you open the Input tab you will see below two options:

-   Event (see individual event data from an event program or a tracker program stage)
-   Enrollment (see data from multiple stages in a tracker program)

![](resources/images/image7.png)

### Program Dimensions { #program-dimensions } 

(In the Event Reports app these are called data dimensions.)

The line list will always be based on event or tracker programs and you can do analysis on a range of dimensions. For programs with category combinations, you can use program categories and category option group sets as dimensions.

> **Tip**
>
> In the Line Listing app, all the dimensions related to a tracker or an event program are present in the program dimension component.

-   Choose a program

    Select program: All the event and tracker programs will be visible in the drop down.

    If you have selected the Event, then for tracker programs you need to select the program stage to get all the data elements, attributes for that particular stage. To be able to select data from multiple stages you need to select "Enrollment" as the input type.

If you select an event program you don’t have to select the stage (unlike the Event Reports app).

![](resources/images/image9.png)

If you select Enrollment in the Input tab then all data elements associated with the program will be available from different stages within the program for the purpose of cross stage selection of data elements. Each data element will act as a dimension.

![](resources/images/image8.png)

If you want to filter the data, by data elements, program attribute, program indicators, category, category option group set you can do so by clicking on the dropdown option.

![](resources/images/image11.png)

There are multiple ways to add data elements to the layout. They can be added by hovering over the dimension and clicking the plus icon or by dragging and dropping a dimension straight to the layout area.

![](resources/images/image10.png)

Alternatively, you can click on the respective data element and then choose to add it in column or filter as shown in below figure.

![](resources/images/image6.png){ width=50% }

Each dimension can have criteria (filters). Data elements of the type option set allows for "in" criteria, where multiple options can be selected.

![](resources/images/image12.png)

Numeric values can be compared to filter values using greater than, equal or less than operators. (Optional) For each data element, specify a filter with operators such as "greater than", "in" or "equal" together with a filter value.

> **Note**
>
> The enhancement in this feature is that you can add multiple conditions and there are also different operators which can be used. You can also filter by empty or not empty.

![](resources/images/image13.png){ width=50% }

In the Line Listing app for BOOLEAN type data element, here in the analysis it will show “Yes”, ”No”, ”Not answered” instead of 0 and 1 as in the Event Reports app or the Data Visualizer app.

![](resources/images/image14.png)

![](resources/images/image16.png)

The line list will be displayed as a table with one row per event. Each dimension can be used as a column in the table or as a filter.

![](resources/images/image22.png)

### Your Dimension { #your-dimension } 

All **Organisation Unit group sets** are present under **Your dimension** component for further evaluation or analysis.

### Main and Program Dimensions { #main-and-program-dimensions } 

#### Select Organisation Unit { #select-organisation-unit } 

The organisation unit dialog is flexible, offering essentially three ways of selecting organisation units:

-   Seleção explícita: Use a **árvore** para selecionar explicitamente as unidades de organização que deseja que apareçam na visualização. Se clicar com o botão direito do mouse em uma unidade organizacional, poderá facilmente escolher selecionar todas as unidades organizacionais abaixo dela.
-   Levels and groups: The **Level** and **Group** dropdowns are a convenient way to select all units in one or more org unit groups or at specific levels. Example: select *CH Mahosot* (level 3) to get all org units at that level.

    > **NOTE**
    >
    > Please note that as soon as at least one level or group has been selected the org unit tree now acts as the boundary for the levels/groups. Example: if you select CH Mahosot (level 3) and Vientiane Capital org unit (at level 2) in the tree you get all units inside that district.\_

-   As unidades de organização do utilizador:
    -   User organisation unit: This is a way to dynamically select the org units that the logged in user is associated with.
    -   User sub-units: Selects the subunits of the user organisation unit.
    -   Unidades sub-x2 do utilizador: Seleciona as unidades dois níveis abaixo da unidade de organização do utilizador.

![](resources/images/image18.png)

#### Event Status { #event-status } 

Filters data based on the event status:  **Active**, **Completed**, **Scheduled**.

You can visualize the data for a particular event status

![](resources/images/image19.png)

#### Program Status { #program-status } 

Filters data based on the program status: **Active**, **Completed** or **Cancelled**.

![](resources/images/image20.png)

#### Created by / Last updated by { #created-by-last-updated-by } 

Will display the data based on who created the particular event.

### Time Dimensions { #time-dimensions } 

This is a new feature in Line Listing app where you will be able to view the data on the basis of different time dimensions.

-   Event date/Report Compilation date
-   Date patient notified in the health system.
-   Incident date
-   Last updated on
-   Scheduled date

You can click on the above time dimension to visualize data on different period dimension, a window will open where you can select one or several periods.

You have three period options: relative periods, fixed periods and start/end dates. You can combine fixed periods and relative periods in the same table You cannot combine fixed periods and relative periods with start/end dates in the same table Overlapping periods are filtered so that they only appear once.

-   Fixed periods: In the **Select period type** box, select a period type. You can select any number of fixed periods from any period type. Fixed periods can for example be "January 2021".
-   Relative periods: In the lower part of the **Periods** section, select as many relative periods as you like. The names are relative to the current date. This means that if the current month is March and you select **Last month**, the month of February is included in the visualization. Relative periods have the advantage that it keeps the data in the report up to date as time goes.
-   Start/end dates: Next to Choose form presets, select **Start/end dates**. This period type lets you specify flexible dates for the time span in the report.

![](resources/images/image21.png)

### Column Header { #column-header } 

You can sort on all column headers

You can filter the specific column by directly clicking the data elements or attributes at the column and you will be able to sort the data values

> **Example**
>
> In the below screenshot, we have selected AEFI – Headache.
>
> ![](resources/images/image22.png)
>
> Once we click on AEFI – Headache we will get a dialog box where we need to select the option we want to filter out. In this we have selected “Yes” only.
>
> ![](resources/images/image23.png){ width=50% }
>
> Once we click on update, we will get the line list with only “Yes” under AEFI – Headache.
>
> ![](resources/images/image1.png)

### Repeatable Events { #repeatable-events } 

This is a new feature in the Line Listing app.

If the program stage has a data element in a repeatable event you can click on the data element and the window will open up where you will be able to see the Repeated event tab

![](resources/images/image2.png){ width=50% }

Then, you can define the most recent events and the oldest events you want in the output as displayed below.

![](resources/images/image3.png){ width=50% }

Once you click on update you will be able to visualize the events of this repeatable program stage as shown below.

![](resources/images/image4.png)

### Applying legend colors { #applying-legend-colors } 

You can apply colors to a visualization by using the legend feature, which can be found under `Options` -> `Legend`

![](resources/images/legend-options.png)

| Opção                             | Descrição                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| ---------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Use a legend for table cell colors | Aplica uma legenda aos itens de visualização, que é uma cor baseada em valor para cada item. As próprias legendas são configuradas no `app de manutenção`.                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Estilo lenda                       | Controls where the color from the legend is applied, either to the text or the background. You can use this option for scorecards to identify high and low values at a glance.                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| Tipo de legenda                        | Controla qual legenda é aplicada. <br> `Usar legenda predefinida por item de dados` aplica uma legenda a cada elemento de dados ou indicador individualmente, com base na legenda atribuída a cada um no` aplicativo de manutenção`. <br> `Selecionar uma única legenda para visualização inteira` aplica uma única legenda a todos os itens de dados, escolhidos em uma lista suspensa de legendas disponíveis. |
| Mostrar chave da legenda                    | Displays a key for the legend on the right side of the visualization, to indicate the value ranges and their respective color.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |

Below is an example of a line list with legend colors applied to the background, per data item.

![](resources/images/legend-example.png)

### Showing the organisation unit hierarchy { #showing-the-organisation-unit-hierarchy } 

You can show the full hierarchy path for organisation units by enabling the **Show organisation unit hierarchy** option in `Options` -> `Style`. When this is enabled, sorting on the organisation unit column will sort the organisation units alphabetically starting from the top level.

![](resources/images/org-unit-hierarchy.png)

### Skip rounding for numeric values { #skip-rounding-for-numeric-values } 

You can control how numeric values are formatted by toggling the **Skip rounding** option in `Options` -> `Data`. When this is enabled, the numeric values are not rounded and all decimals are shown. By default rounding is applied.

Below is an example of the same table with and without the option applied.

![](resources/images/skip-rounding-example.png)
![](resources/images/no-skip-rounding-example.png)

### View options { #view-options } 

To allow more space for the line list itself, there are various ways to hide panels on the top and sides:

1. The "full screen button" in the title bar will hide the main sidebar on the left and the layout panel at the top of the screen.
2. If the interpretations panel is expanded on the right, this can be hidden by clicking the "interpretations button" just below the user profile menu.
3. Each panel can also be shown/hidden by using the "View menu" in the main toolbar.

![](resources/images/view-options.png)

To provide more space for the content in the "Accessory Side Panel" it can be resized using the mouse as illustrated below:

![](resources/images/resizable_accessory_sidebar.png)

Resizing can also be done using the left/right arrow key on the keyboard. These keyboard shortcuts become active after giving focus to the resize-handle (by repeatedly hitting the tab key):

![](resources/images/resizable_accessory_sidebar_keyboard.png)

The "Accessory Side Panel" can be reset to its default width, by using the "View" menu or double clicking the resize-handle.

![](resources/images/resizable_accessory_sidebar_reset.png)


# Usando o aplicativo Maps { #using_maps }

## Sobre o aplicativo Maps { #about_maps }

The Maps App was introduced in release 2.29 and serves as a replacement
of the GIS App offering a more intuitive and user-friendly interface.
The mapping engine from version 2.34 is based on WebGL technology,
capable of showing thousands of features on a map simultaneously.

With the Maps app you can overlay multiple layers and choose among
different basemaps. You can create thematic maps of areas and points,
view facilities based on classifications, and visualize catchment areas
for each facility. You can add labels to areas and points, and search
and filter using various criteria. You can move points and set locations
on the fly. Maps can be saved as favorites and shared with other users
and groups, or downloaded as an image.

> **Note**
>
> To use predefined legends in the **Maps** app, you need to create them
> first in the **Maintenance** app.

![](resources/images/maps/maps_main.png)

- The **layer panel** on the left side of the workspace shows an
  overview of the layers for the current map:

  - As layers are added, using the **(+) Add layer** button, they
    are arranged and managed in this panel.

  - The **basemap** is always shown in the panel. The default
    basemap is OSM Light and is selected by default, unless a different
    basemap has been configured in the system settings. OpenStreetMap
    Detailed contains more map features and place names. There are 4
    basemaps from Bing Maps, replacing Google Maps provided in previous
    versions. Bing Road and Bing Dark shows roads, borders and places.
    Use the dark version if the colors on your map layers are bright.
    Bing Aerial and Bing Aerial Labels shos satellite and detailed aerial
    imagery. Switch between them by selecting the desired image.

  - The small arrow button to the right of the layer panel, at the
    top, allows the panel to be hidden or shown.

<!-- end list -->

- The **File** button near the top left allows you to open and save
  maps. See [using the maps file menu](#using_maps_file_menu) for more detailed information.

<!-- end list -->

- O botão **Descarregar** próximo ao botão Arquivo permite que baixe o mapa atual como uma imagem PNG.

<!-- end list -->

- The **Interpretations** button at top right opens an interpretations
  panel on the right side of the workspace. See [viewing interpretations](#mapsInterpretation) for more information.

<!-- end list -->

- The **+** and **-** buttons on the map allow you to zoom in and out
  of the map respectively. The mouse scroll wheel zoom is continuous,
  allowing us to fit the map perfectly to your content.

- The **rotate map** button (triangle arrows) allows you to
  rotate and tilt the map to enhance the view of your data. Press the button
  (or the Control key on your keyboard) while moving your mouse to change the
  map view. Click to button again to reset the view.

- **Fullscreen** (four arrows) allows you to view the map in fullscreen.
  To exit fullscreen click the button again or the escape key on your keyboard.

* **Zoom to content** (bounded magnifying glass symbol) automatically
  adjusts the zoom level and map center position to put the data on
  your map in focus.

* **Search** (magnifying glass symbol) allows searching for and
  jumping to a location on the map.

* O botão **régua** permite medir distâncias e áreas no mapa.

* Right-click on the map to display the longitude and latitude of that
  location.

**Basemaps**

Basemap layers are represented by layer _cards_ in the layer panel such
as:

![](resources/images/maps/maps_basemap_card.png)

Ao longo da parte superior da secção do mapa base, da esquerda para a direita:

- O título do mapa base selecionado

- Um símbolo de seta para recolher e expandir a secção do mapa base

In the middle of the basemap card is the list of available basemaps. The
current basemap is highlighted.

Ao longo da parte inferior da secção do mapa base está:

- Um símbolo de olho para alternar a visibilidade da camada

- Um controle deslizante para modificar a transparência da camada

## Crie um novo mapa { #using_maps_create_map }

1.  In the **Apps** menu, click **Maps**. The **DHIS2 Maps** window
    opens.

2.  Click the (+) Add layer button in the top left. You are presented
    with the layer selection dialog:

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_layer_selection.png)

3.  Selecione uma camada para adicionar ao mapa atual. As opções possíveis são:

    - [Thematic](#using_maps_thematic_layer)

    - [Events](#using_maps_event_layer)

    - [Tracked entities](#using_maps_tracked_entity_layer)

    - [Unidades sanitárias] (# using_maps_facility_layer)

    - [Org units](#using_maps_org_unit_layer)

    In addition, there are several layers provided by Google Earth
    Engine and other services:

    - População

    - Population age groups

    - Building footprints

    - Elevação

    - Precipitação

    - Temperatura

    - Cobertura da terra

    _Labels overlay_ is an [external
    layer](#using_maps_external_map_layers) defined in the Maintenance app.

## Gerir camadas temáticas { #using_maps_thematic_layer }

_Thematic maps_ represent spatial variation of geographic distributions.
Select your desired combination of indicator/data element, period and
organisation unit level. If your database has coordinates and aggregated
data values for these organisation units, they will appear on the map.

> **Note**
>
> You must generate the DHIS2 analytics tables to have aggregated data
> values available.

![](resources/images/maps/maps_thematic_mapping.png)

Thematic layers are represented by layer _cards_ in the layer panel such
as:

Ao longo da parte superior do cartão temático, da esquerda para a direita:

- Um campo de captura para permitir arrastar e reordenar as camadas com o mouse

- O título e o período associados à camada

- Um símbolo de seta para recolher e expandir o cartão temático

In the middle of the thematic card is a legend indicating the value
ranges displayed on the layer.

Ao longo da parte inferior da secção temática, da esquerda para a direita:

- Um botão de edição (lápis) para abrir a caixa de diálogo de configuração da camada

- Um símbolo de olho para alternar a visibilidade da camada

- Um controle deslizante para modificar a transparência da camada

- Um botão de mais ações (três pontos) com opções adicionais:

  - A **data table** toggle button to show or hide the data table
    associated with the layer

  - **Descarregar de dados** permite que baixe os dados para esta camada no formato GeoJSON para uso em outro software de mapeamento

  - **Editar camada** é igual ao botão editar acima

  - **Remover camada** irá remover esta camada do mapa atual.

### Crie uma camada temática { #create-a-thematic-layer } 

To create an event layer, choose **Thematic** on the **Add
layer** selection. This opens the Events layer configuration dialog.

1.  Na aba **DADOS**:

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_thematic_layer_dialog_DATA.png)

    - Select a data type and then select respectively the group and
      the target element. The available fields depend on the type of
      item selected.

    - Select a value from the **Aggregation type** field for the data
      values to be shown on the map. By default, "By data element" is
      selected. Alternative values are: Count; Average; Sum; Standard
      deviation; Variance; Min; Max. See also [Aggregation
      operators](https://dhis2.github.io/dhis2-docs/master/en/user/html/ch10s05.html#d0e8082).

    - **Only show completed events**: Includes only completed events in the aggregation process.
      This is useful when you want to exclude partial events in indicator calculations. Available
      for indicators, program indictors and event data items.

2.  Na aba **PERÍODO**

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_thematic_layer_dialog_PERIOD.png)

    - select the time span over which the thematic data is mapped.
      You can select either a relative or a fixed period.

      - Período relativo

        In the **Period type** field select **Relative**, then
        select one of the relative periods, for example **Last year** or
        **Last 12 months**, in the **Period** field.

        A **default relative period for analysis** can be set in the **Systems Settings**
        app.

        If you select a relative period covering multiple years/months/weeks/days
        the layer can be displayed as

        - Único (agregado)

          Mostra os valores agregados para o período relativo selecionado (padrão).

        - Linha do tempo

          Includes a timeline allowing you to step through the periods.
          Only one timeline layer can be added to the same map.

        - Divida as visualizações do mapa

          Show multiple maps allowing you to compare different periods
          side by side. Supported for relative periods with 12 items
          or below. Can not be combined with other layer types.

      - Período fixo

        In the **Period type** field select period length, then
        select the target in the **Period** field.

      - Datas de início/término

        In the **Period type** field select **Start/end dates**
        and fill in a start date and an end date.

3.  Na aba **ORG UNITS**:

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_thematic_layer_dialog_ORG_UNITS.png)

    - Select the organisation units you want to include in the layer.
      It is possible to select either

      - One or more specific organisation units, organisation unit levels in
        the hierarchy, organisation unit groups, or

      - A relative level in the organisation unit hierarchy, with
        respect to the user. By selecting a **User organisation
        unit** the map data will appear differently for users at
        different levels in the organisation unit hierarchy.

    - **Use associated geometry**: This dropdown will only show if there
      are any additional geometry available for your organisation units.
      This is typically used to show facility catchment areas.

4.  Na aba **FILTRO**:

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_thematic_layer_dialog_FILTER.png)

    - Click ADD FILTER and select an available data item to add a new
      filter to the data set.

      - Select a data dimension from the dropdown box. You can
        reduce the number of dimensions shown by using the search field.
        Click on the name to select a dimension.

      - When a dimension is selected you get a second dropdown with
        dimension items. Check the items you want to include in the
        filter.

      Multiple filters may be added. Click the trash button on the right of
      the filter to remove it.

5.  Na aba **ESTILO**:

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_thematic_layer_dialog_STYLE.png)

    - Selecione **Choropleth** ou **Mapas de bolhas**.

      - Choropleth will assign a color to each org unit shape according to the
        data value. This is the recommended technique if the data is normalised
        (per capita).

      - Bubble map will show data values as proportional circles. Use this
        technique if the data is not normalised (absolute numbers). The circles are
        placed in the center of each org unit.

    - Set the **Low radius** and **High radius** for the proportional circles or the
      point facilities. The circles will be scaled between low and high radius according
      to the data value. The radius needs to be between 0 and 50 px.

    - **Show labels**: Allows org unit names to be shown on the layer. Font size, weight,
      style and color can be modified here.

    - **Show no data**: By default org units with missing data values will not show on the map.
      Check this box if you want to show them with a color. Click the color to change it.

    - Select the legend type:

      - **Automatic color legend**: the application will create a legend for you based on
        what classification method, number of classes and the color scale you select. Set
        **Classification** to either:

        - Intervalos iguais

          the range of each interval will be (highest data value - lowest data value / number of classes)

        - Contagens iguais

          o criador da legenda tentará distribuir as unidades de organização uniformemente.

      - **Legenda de cores predefinidas**: Selecione entre as legendas predefinidas.

      - **Single color legend**: Select the color of the bubbles or circles. Only available
        for bubble maps.

6.  Clique em **ADICIONAR CAMADA**.

### Modificar uma camada temática { #modify-a-thematic-layer } 

1.  In the layer panel, click the edit (pencil) icon on the thematic
    layer card.

2.  Modifique a configuração em qualquer uma das guias conforme desejado.

3.  Clique em **ACTUALIZAR CAMADA**.

### Filtrar valores em uma camada temática { #filter-values-in-a-thematic-layer } 

Thematic layers have a **data table** option that can be toggled on or
off from the thematic layer card.

![](resources/images/maps/maps_thematic_layer_data_table.png)

A tabela de dados exibe os dados que formam a camada temática.

- clicking on a title will sort the table based on that column;
  toggling between ascending and descending.

- entering text or expressions into the filter fields below the titles
  will apply those filters to the data, and the display will adjust
  according to the filter. The filters are applied as follows:

  - NOME

    filtrar por nome contendo o texto fornecido

  - VALOR

    filter values by given numbers and/or ranges, for example:
    2,\>3&\<8

  - LEGENDA

    filtrar por legenda contendo o texto fornecido

  - FAIXA

    filtrar por intervalos contendo o texto fornecido

  - NÍVEL

    nível de filtro por números e/ou intervalos, por exemplo: 2, \> 3 & \ <8

  - PARENTE

    filtrar por nomes de parentes contendo o texto fornecido

  - ID

    filtrar por IDs contendo o texto fornecido

  - MODELO

    filtrar por tipos de exibição GIS contendo o texto dado

  - COR

    filtrar por nomes de cores contendo o texto fornecido

> **Note**
>
> Data table filters are temporary and are not saved with the map layers
> as part of the favourite.

### Procure uma unidade organizacional { #search-for-an-organisation-unit } 

The NAME filter field in the data table provides an effective way of
searching for individual organisation units.

### Open organisation unit profile { #open-organisation-unit-profile } 

You can open the [organisation unit profile](#using_maps_org_unit_profile) in three ways:

1. Click on any of the organisasjon units shown on the map, and click
   the **View profile** button in the popup.

2. Right-click one of the organisation units on the map, and select **View profile**
   from the menu.

3. Click on an organisation unit row in the **data table**.

### Navegue entre as hierarquias da organização { #navigate-between-organisation-hierarchies } 

When there are visible organisation units on the map, you can easily
navigate up and down in the hierarchy without using the level/parent
user interface.

1.  Clique com o botão direito em uma das unidades de organização.

2.  Selecione **Drill up one level** ou **Drill down one level**.

    The drill down option is disabled if you are on the lowest level or
    if there are no coordinates available on the level below. Likewise
    the drill up option is disabled from the highest level.

### Remover camada temática { #remove-thematic-layer } 

Para limpar todos os dados em uma camada temática:

1.  In the layer card to the left, click the _more actions_ (three dots) icon
    and then on **Remove layer**.

    A camada é removida do mapa atual.

## Gerir camadas de eventos { #using_maps_event_layer }

The event layer displays the geographical location of events registered
in the DHIS2 tracker. Provided that events have associated point or polygon
coordinates, you can use this layer to drill down from the aggregated
data displayed in the thematic layers to the underlying individual
events or cases.

You can also display aggregated events for facilities or organisation
units. You do this through a thematic layer using event data
items. This is useful when you only have the coordinates for the Org
Unit under which the events are recorded.

![](resources/images/maps/maps_event_layer.png)

Event layers are represented by layer _cards_ in the layer panel such
as:

Ao longo da parte superior do card do evento, da esquerda para a direita:

- Um campo de captura para permitir arrastar e reordenar as camadas com o mouse

- O título e o período associados à camada

- Um símbolo de seta para recolher e expandir o cartão de evento

In the middle of the event card is a legend indicating the styling of
the layer.

Ao longo da parte inferior do card do evento, da esquerda para a direita:

- Um botão de edição (lápis) para abrir a caixa de diálogo de configuração da camada

- Um símbolo de olho para alternar a visibilidade da camada

- Um controle deslizante para modificar a transparência da camada

- Um botão de mais ações (três pontos) com opções adicionais:

  - Um botão de alternância **tabela de dados** para mostrar ou ocultar a tabela de dados associada à camada

  - **Descarregar de dados** permite que baixe os dados para esta camada no formato GeoJSON para uso em outro software de mapeamento

  - **Editar camada** é igual ao botão editar acima

  - **Remover camada** irá remover esta camada do mapa atual.

### Crie uma camada de evento { #maps_create_event_layer }

To create an event layer, choose **Events** on the **Add
layer** selection. This opens the Events layer configuration dialog.

1.  Na aba **DADOS**:

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_event_layer_dialog_DATA.png)

    - Select a program and then select a program stage. The **Stage**
      field is only shown once a program is selected.

      If there is only one stage available for the selected program,
      the stage is automatically selected.

    - Select a value from the **Coordinate field** for the positions
      shown on the map. By default, "Event location" is selected.
      Depending on the data elements or attributes that belong to a
      program, other coordinates such as "Household position" are
      available.

    - By default all events with coordinates are shown on the map.
      Use the **Event status** field to only show events having one
      status: Active, Completed, Schedule, Overdue or Skipped.

2.  Na aba **PERÍODO**

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_event_layer_dialog_PERIOD.png)

    - select the time span for when the events took place. You can
      select either a fixed period or a relative period.

      - Período relativo

        In the **Period** field, select one of the relative periods,
        for example **This month** or **Last year**.

        A **default relative period for analysis** can be set in the
        **Systems Settings** app.

      - Período fixo

        In the **Period** field, select **Start/end dates** and fill
        in a start date and an end date.

3.  Na aba **ORG UNITS**:

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_event_layer_dialog_ORG_UNITS.png)

    - Select the organisation units you want to include in the layer.
      It is possible to select either

      - Uma ou mais unidades de organização específicas, ou

      - A relative level in the organisation unit hierarchy, with
        respect to the user. By selecting a **User organisation
        unit** the map data will appear differently for users at
        different levels in the organisation unit hierarchy.

4.  Na aba **FILTRO**:

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_event_layer_dialog_FILTER.png)

    - Click ADD FILTER and select an available data item to add a new
      filter to the data set.

      - For data item of type _option set_, you can select any of
        the options from the dropdown box by using the down-wards
        arrow or by start typing directly in the box to filter for
        options.

      - For data item of type _number_, you can select operators like
        equal, not equal, greater than or less than.

      - For data item of type _boolean_ (yes/no), you can check the box
        if the condition should be valid or true.

      - For data item of type _text_ you will get two choices:
        **Contains** implies that the query will match all values
        which contains your search value, and **Is exact** implies
        that only values which is completely identical to your
        search query will be returned.

      Multiple filters may be added. Click the trash button on the right of
      the filter to remove it.

5.  Na aba **ESTILO**:

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_event_layer_dialog_STYLE.png)

    - Select **Group events** to group nearby events (cluster), or
      **View all events** to display events individually.

    - Selecione uma **cor** para o evento ou pontos de cluster.

    - Selecione o **raio** (entre 1 e 20) para os eventos.

    - Select **Show buffer** to display visual buffer around each
      event. The radius of the buffer can be modified here. This
      option is only available if you select **View all events**
      above.

    - Select a **Style by data element** to colorise the events
      according to a data value. If you also select to group events,
      the culsters will be displayed as small donut charts showing
      the distribution of the data values. The options varies for
      different data types:

      - **Option sets**: Select a color for each option in an option
        set. You can set default colors for an option in the
        Maintenance app.

      - **Numbers**: You can style a numeric data element in [the same
        way as thematic layers](#using_maps_thematic_layer_style) using
        automatic or predefined legends.

      - **Booleans**: Select a color for true/yes and another for
        false/no.

6.  Clique em **ADICIONAR CAMADA**.

### Modificar uma camada de evento { #modify-an-event-layer } 

1.  In the layer panel, click the edit (pencil) icon on the event layer
    card.

2.  Modify the setting on the DATA, PERIOD, FILTER, ORG UNIT and STYLE
    tabs as desired.

3.  Clique em **ACTUALIZAR CAMADA**.

### Listing and filtering events { #listing-and-filtering-events } 

Event layers have a **data table** option that can be toggled on or
off from the event layer card.

![](resources/images/maps/maps_event_layer_data_table.png)

The data table displays the data forming the event layer.

- clicking on a title will sort the table based on that column;
  toggling between ascending and descending.

- entering text or expressions into the filter fields below the titles
  will apply those filters to the data, and the display will adjust
  according to the filter. The filters are applied as follows:

  - ID

    filter by event IDs containing the given text

  - ORG UNIT

    filter by org unit name containing the given text

  - EVENT TIME

    filter by event time containing the given text

  - MODELO

    filtrar por tipos de exibição GIS contendo o texto dado

  - **Style by data element**: If events are styled by a data element
    (e.g. gender) both the data value and the color can be filtered.

  - **Display in reports**: Data elements checked to display in reports will
    be shown in separate columns (see below how to add them).

  - Numeric data values can be filtered by given numbers, and/or ranges,
    for example: 2,\>3&\<8

> **Note**
>
> Data table filters are temporary and are not saved with the map layers
> as part of the favourite.

### Modify information in event data table and popups { #modify-information-in-event-data-table-and-popups } 

Pode modificar as informações exibidas na janela pop-up do evento.

![](resources/images/maps/maps_eventlayer_eventinfopopup.png)

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Manutenção **.

2.  Selecione ** Programa **.

3.  Clique no programa que deseja modificar e selecione **2 Atribuir elementos de dados**.

4.  For every data element you want to display in the pop-up window,
    select corresponding **Display in reports**.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Baixar dados brutos da camada de evento { #download-raw-event-layer-data } 

Os dados brutos para camadas de eventos podem ser baixados no formato GeoJSON para geoanálise e processamento mais avançados em software de desktop GIS como [QGIS] (https://www.qgis.org/). Os dados baixados incluem todos os eventos individuais como recursos do GeoJSON, incluindo atributos para cada elemento de dados selecionado para ** Exibir em relatórios **.

![](resources/images/maps/maps_data_download_dialog.png)

- Na secção de camada à esquerda, clique no ícone _mais ações_ (três pontos) e em ** Baixar dados **

- Selecione o **formato de ID** para usar como a chave para os valores do elemento de dados no arquivo GeoJSON baixado. Existem três opções disponíveis:

  - **ID** - Use o ID exclusivo do elemento de dados
  - **Nome** - Use o nome amigável do elemento de dados (traduzido)
  - **Código** - Use o código do elemento de dados

- Selecione se deseja ou não ** Usar chaves legíveis ** para outros atributos do Evento, como Estágio do Programa, Latitude, Longitude, Dados do Evento e ID, Nome e Código da Unidade da Organização. Quando esta opção é **não** selecionada, esses valores serão o ID amigável ao computador em vez do nome legível (e traduzido) por humanos.

- Clique no botão **DESCARREGAR** para gerar e baixar um arquivo GeoJSON. Os dados serão solicitados ao servidor DHIS2 e processados pelo aplicativo de mapas. Esta operação pode levar vários minutos para ser concluída.

- Uma vez que o arquivo GeoJSON foi baixado, ele pode ser importado para a maioria dos aplicativos de software GIS padrão.

> Observe que os dados baixados não incluem informações de estilo, pois não são nativamente suportados pelo formato GeoJSON. Os estilos podem ser recriados opcionalmente em aplicativos GIS externos usando os atributos de cada recurso.

### Limpar camada de evento { #clear-event-layer } 

Para limpar todos os dados da camada de evento em um mapa:

1.  In the layer card to the left, click the _more actions_ (three dots) icon
    and then on **Remove layer**.

    A camada é removida do mapa atual.

## Gerenciar camadas de entidades rastreadas { #using_maps_tracked_entity_layer }

The tracked entity layer displays the geographical location of tracked
entities registered in the DHIS2. Provided that tracked entities have
associated point or polygon coordinates, you can explore these on a map.

![](resources/images/maps/maps_tracked_entity_layer.png)

Tracked entity layers are represented by layer cards in the layer panel
such as:

Ao longo da parte superior do cartão de entidade rastreada, da esquerda para a direita:

- A grab field to allow dragging and re-ordering layers with the
  mouse.

- O título e o período associados à camada.

- Um símbolo de seta para recolher e expandir o cartão de entidade rastreada.

In the middle of the tracked entity card is a legend indicating the
styling of the layer.

Ao longo da parte inferior da secção de entidade rastreada, da esquerda para a direita:

- Um botão de edição (lápis) para abrir a caixa de diálogo de configuração da camada

- Um símbolo de olho para alternar a visibilidade da camada

- Um controle deslizante para modificar a transparência da camada

- Um botão de mais ações (três pontos) com opções adicionais:

  - **Editar camada** é igual ao botão editar acima

  - **Remover camada** irá remover esta camada do mapa atual.

### Crie uma camada de entidade rastreada { #maps_create_tracked_enity_layer }

To create an tracked entity layer, choose **Tracked entities** on the
**Add layer** selection. This opens the Tracked entity layer
configuration dialog.

1.  Na aba **DADOS**:

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_tracked_entity_layer_dialog_DATA.png)

    - Selecione o ** Tipo de entidade rastreada ** que deseja mostrar no mapa.

    - Selecione um ** Programa ** ao qual pertencem as entidades rastreadas.

    - Use the **Program status** field to select the enrollment status of tracked entities
      to include: All, Active, Completed or Cancelled.

    - Set the **Follow up** status of the tracked entity for the given
      program.

2.  Na aba **Relacionamentos**

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_tracked_entity_layer_dialog_RELATIONSHIPS.png)

    > **Caution**
    >
    > Displaying tracked entity relationships in Maps is an experimental feature

    - Se um tipo de entidade rastreada foi selecionado, pode marcar a caixa de seleção ** Exibir relacionamentos de entidade rastreada **

    - Depois de marcada, pode selecionar o tipo de relacionamento a ser exibido no mapa na lista suspensa. Apenas relacionamentos do tipo de Entidade rastreada selecionada estão disponíveis.

3.  Na aba **PERÍODO**

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_tracked_entity_layer_dialog_PERIOD.png)

    - If no program is selected, you can set start and end dates when
      the tracked entities were last updated.

    - If a program is selected, you can set the period when tracked entities were last
      updated or when they were registered or enrolled in the program.

4.  Na aba **ORG UNITS**:

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_tracked_entity_layer_dialog_ORG_UNITS.png)

    - Select the organisation units you want to include in the layer.
      You have 3 selection modes:

      - **Selected only**: Include tracked entities belonging to
        selected org units only.

      - **Selected and below**: Included tracked entities in and
        right below selected org units.

      - **Selected and all below**: Included tracked entities in and
        all below selected org units.

5.  Na aba **ESTILO**:

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_tracked_entity_layer_dialog_STYLE.png)

    - Selecione uma **cor** para os pontos e polígonos das entidades rastreadas.

    - Select the **point size** (radius between 1 and 20) for the
      points.

    - Select **Show buffer** to display visual buffer around each
      tracked entity. The buffer distance in meters can be modified
      here.

    - Se um tipo de relacionamento foi selecionado na guia de relacionamentos, pode selecionar **cor**, **tamanho do ponto** e **cor da linha** para relacionamentos e instâncias de entidades rastreadas relacionadas

6.  Clique em **ADICIONAR/ATUALIZAR CAMADA**.

### Modificar uma camada de entidade rastreada { #modify-a-tracked-entity-layer } 

1.  In the layer panel, click the edit (pencil) icon on the tracked
    entity layer card.

2.  Modify the setting on the DATA, PERIOD, ORG UNIT and STYLE tabs as
    desired.

3.  Clique em **ACTUALIZAR CAMADA**.

### Limpar uma camada de entidade rastreada { #clear-a-tracked-entity-layer } 

Para limpar uma camada de entidade rastreada de um mapa:

1.  In the layer card to the left, click the _more actions_ (three dots) icon
    and then on **Remove layer**.

    A camada é removida do mapa atual.

## Geir camadas de instalações { #using_maps_facility_layer }

The facility layer displays icons that represent types of facilities.
Polygons do not show up on the map, so make sure that you select an
organisation unit level that has facilities.

_A polygon is an enclosed area on a map representing a country, a
district or a park._

![](resources/images/maps/maps_facility_layer.png)

Facility layers are represented by layer _cards_ in the layer panel such
as:

Ao longo da parte superior da secção de unidades sanitárias, da esquerda para a direita:

- Um campo de captura para permitir arrastar e reordenar as camadas com o mouse

- O título das **Unidades Sanitárias**

- Um símbolo de olho para alternar a visibilidade da camada

- Um símbolo de seta para recolher e expandir a secção de unidades sanitárias

In the middle of the facilities card is a legend indicating the group
set representation.

Ao longo da parte inferior da secção de unidades sanitárias, da esquerda para a direita:

- Um botão de edição (lápis) para abrir a caixa de diálogo de configuração da camada

- Um controle deslizante para modificar a transparência da camada

- Um botão de mais ações (três pontos) com opções adicionais:

  - A **data table** toggle button to show or hide the data table
    associated with the layer

  - **Descarregar de dados** permite que baixe os dados para esta camada no formato GeoJSON para uso em outro software de mapeamento

  - **Editar camada** é igual ao botão editar acima

  - **Remover camada** irá remover esta camada do mapa atual.

### Crie uma camada de instalação { #create-a-facility-layer } 

To create facility layer, choose **Facilities** on the **Add
layer**selection. This opens the Facility layer configuration dialog.

1.  Na aba **UNIDADES DE ORGANIZAÇÃO**

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_facility_layer_dialog_ORG_UNITS.png)

    - Select the organisation unit level(s) and/or group(s) from the
      selection fields on the right hand side.

    - Select the organisation units you want to include in the layer.
      It is possible to select either

      - Uma ou mais unidades de organização específicas, ou

      - A relative level in the organisation unit hierarchy, with
        respect to the user. By selecting a **User organisation
        unit** the map data will appear differently for users at
        different levels in the organisation unit hierarchy.

    - The system administrator can set the default organsation unit
      level containing facilities in the **System Settings** app.

    - **Use associated geometry**: This dropdown will only show if there
      are any additional geometry available for your organisation units.
      This is typically used to show facility catchment areas.

2.  Na aba **ESTILO**:

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_facility_layer_dialog_STYLE.png)

    - Selecione qualquer estilo que deseja aplicar às unidades sanitárias.

      - Mostrar rótulos

        Allows labels to be shown on the layer. Font size, weight
        and color can be modified here.

      - Mostrar buffer

        Allows a visual buffer to be displayed on the layer around
        each facility. The radius of the buffer can be modified
        here. Buffer option is not available if asscoiated geometry is used.

    - Facilities can be styled an **organisation unit group set** using
      different icons. Select a group set from the list of organisation
      unit group sets defined for your DHIS2 instance.
      The system administrator can set the default organsation unit
      group set in the **System Settings** app.

    - If no group set is selected, the facilities will be shown as filled
      circles. The color and the circle radius can be changed.

3.  Clique em **ADICIONAR CAMADA**.

### Criar ou modificar uma camada de instalação { #create-or-modify-a-facility-layer } 

1.  In the layer panel, click the edit (pencil) icon on the facility
    layer card.

2.  Modify the setting on the GROUP SET, ORGANISATION UNITS and STYLE
    tabs as desired.

3.  Clique em **ACTUALIZAR CAMADA**.

### Filtrar valores em uma camada de instalação { #filter-values-in-a-facility-layer } 

Facility layers have a **data table** option that can be toggled on or
off from the facility layer card.

![](resources/images/maps/maps_facility_layer_data_table.png)

A tabela de dados exibe os dados que formam a camada de unidade sanitária.

- clicking on a title will sort the table based on that column;
  toggling between ascending and descending.

- entering text or expressions into the filter fields below the titles
  will apply those filters to the data, and the display will adjust
  according to the filter. The filters are applied as follows:

  - NOME

    filtrar por nome contendo o texto fornecido

  - ID

    filtrar por IDs contendo o texto fornecido

  - MODELO

    filtrar por tipos de exibição GIS contendo o texto dado

> **Note**
>
> Data table filters are temporary and are not saved with the map layers
> as part of the favourite.

### Procure uma instalação { #search-for-a-facility } 

The NAME filter field in the data table provides an effective way of
searching for individual facilities.

### Open organisation unit profile { #open-organisation-unit-profile } 

You can open the [organisation unit profile](#using_maps_org_unit_profile) in three ways:

1. Click on any of the organisasjon units shown on the map, and click
   the **View profile** button in the popup.

2. Right-click one of the organisation units on the map, and select **View profile**
   from the menu.

3. Click on an organisation unit row in the **data table**.

### Remover camada de instalação { #remove-facility-layer } 

Para limpar todos os dados em uma camada de unidade sanitária:

1.  In the layer card to the left, click the _more actions_ (three dots) icon
    and then on **Remove layer**.

    A camada é removida do mapa atual.

## Gerir camadas da unidade organizacional { #using_maps_org_unit_layer }

The org unit layer displays the borders and locations of your
organisation units. This layer is particularly useful if you are offline
and don't have access to background maps.

![](resources/images/maps/maps_org_unit_layer.png)

Org unit layers are represented by layer _cards_ in the layer panel such
as:

Na parte superior da secção da unidade organizacional, da esquerda para a direita:

- Um campo de captura para permitir arrastar e reordenar as camadas com o mouse

- O título da **Unidade organizacional**

- Um símbolo de seta para recolher e expandir a secção da unidade organizacional

Na parte superior da secção da unidade organizacional, da esquerda para a direita:

- Um botão de edição (lápis) para abrir a caixa de diálogo de configuração da camada

- Um símbolo de olho para alternar a visibilidade da camada

- Um controle deslizante para modificar a transparência da camada

- Um botão de mais ações (três pontos) com opções adicionais:

  - A **data table** toggle button to show or hide the data table
    associated with the layer

  - **Descarregar de dados** permite que baixe os dados para esta camada no formato GeoJSON para uso em outro software de mapeamento

  - **Editar camada** é igual ao botão editar acima

  - **Remover camada** irá remover esta camada do mapa atual.

### Create an org unit layer { #create-an-org-unit-layer } 

To create an org unit layer, choose **Org units** on the **Add
layer** selection. This opens the org unit layer configuration dialog.

1.  Na aba **UNIDADES DE ORGANIZAÇÃO**

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_org_unit_layer_dialog_ORG_UNITS.png)

    - select the organisation unit level(s) and/or group(s) from the
      selection fields on the right hand side.

    - Select the organisation units you want to include in the layer.
      It is possible to select either

      - Uma ou mais unidades de organização específicas, ou

      - A relative level in the organisation unit hierarchy, with
        respect to the user. By selecting a **User organisation
        unit** the map data will appear differently for users at
        different levels in the organisation unit hierarchy.

    - **Use associated geometry**: This dropdown will only show if there
      are any additional geometry available for your organisation units.
      This is typically used to show facility catchment areas.

2.  Na aba **ESTILO**:

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_org_unit_layer_dialog_STYLE.png)

    - select any styling you wish to apply to the org unitss.

      - Labels

        Allows labels to be shown on the layer. Font style can be
        modified here.

      - Boundary color

        Allows the boundary or outline color of the organisation units
        to be changed.

      - Raio do ponto

        Sets the base radius when point type elements, such as
        facilities, are presented on the org unit layer.

    - Organisation units can be styled an **organisation unit group set**
      using different colors. Select a group set from the list of organisation
      unit group sets defined for your DHIS2 instance.

3.  Clique em **ADICIONAR CAMADA**.

### Modify an org unit layer { #modify-an-org-unit-layer } 

1.  In the layer panel, click the edit (pencil) icon on the org unit
    layer card.

2.  Modify the setting on the ORGANISATION UNITS and STYLE tabs as
    desired.

3.  Clique em **ACTUALIZAR CAMADA**.

### Filter values in an org unit layer { #filter-values-in-an-org-unit-layer } 

Org unit layers have a **data table** option that can be toggled on or
off from the org unit layer card.

![](resources/images/maps/maps_bound_layer_data_table.png)

The data table displays the data forming the org unit layer.

- clicking on a title will sort the table based on that column;
  toggling between ascending and descending.

- entering text or expressions into the filter fields below the titles
  will apply those filters to the data, and the display will adjust
  according to the filter. The filters are applied as follows:

  - NOME

    filtrar por nome contendo o texto fornecido

  - NÍVEL

    nível de filtro por números e/ou intervalos, por exemplo: 2, \> 3 & \ <8

  - PARENTE

    filtrar por nomes de parentes contendo o texto fornecido

  - ID

    filtrar por IDs contendo o texto fornecido

  - MODELO

    filtrar por tipos de exibição GIS contendo o texto dado

> **Note**
>
> Data table filters are temporary and are not saved with the map layers
> as part of the favourite.

### Pesquise uma unidade organizacional { #search-for-an-organisational-unit } 

The NAME filter field in the data table provides an effective way of
searching for individual organisational units displayed in the org unit
layer.

### Open organisation unit profile { #open-organisation-unit-profile } 

You can open the [organisation unit profile](#using_maps_org_unit_profile) in three ways:

1. Click on any of the organisasjon units shown on the map, and click
   the **View profile** button in the popup.

2. Right-click one of the organisation units on the map, and select **View profile**
   from the menu.

3. Click on an organisation unit row in the **data table**.

### Navegue entre as hierarquias da organização { #navigate-between-organisation-hierarchies } 

You can modify the target of the org unit layer in the hierarchy without
using the level/parent user interface.

1.  Clique com o botão direito em uma das unidades de organização.

2.  Selecione **Drill up one level** ou **Drill down one level**.

    The drill down option is disabled if you are on the lowest level.
    Likewise the drill up option is disabled from the highest level.

### Remove org unit layer { #remove-org-unit-layer } 

To clear all data in an org unit layer:

1.  In the layer card to the left, click the _more actions_ (three dots) icon
    and then on **Remove layer**.

    A camada é removida do mapa atual.

## Gerir camada do Earth Engine { #using_maps_gee }

![](resources/images/maps/maps_ee_layer.png)

The layers from Google Earth Engine let you display and aggregate external
data to your organisation units. Use the population layer to calculate the
number of people living in a district, or within a distance from a health
facility. The elevation layer allows you to find the lowest, highest and
mean elevation. Use the landcover layer to see the forest cover, croplands
or urban areas, and calculate the percentage for each organisation unit.

The following layers are supported:

![](resources/images/maps/maps_ee_layer_types.png)

- **Population**: Detailed population data from WorldPop showing the estimated
  number of poeple living in an area. Available for yearly periods from 2000 and
  onwards.

- **Population age groups**: Estimated number of people living in an area, grouped
  by age and gender.

- **Building footprints**: The outlines of buildings derived from high-resolution
  satellite imagery. Only for the continent of Africa.

- **Elevação**: Elevação acima do nível do mar.

- **Precipitation**: The values are in millimeters within 5 days periods. Updated
  monthly, during the 3rd week of the following month. Collected from satellite and weather stations on the ground.

- **Temperature**: Land surface temperatures collected from satellite.
  Blank spots will appear in areas with a persistent cloud cover.

- **Cobertura do solo**: 17 tipos distintos de cobertura do solo coletados de satélites pela NASA.

### Crie uma camada do Earth Engine { #create-an-earth-engine-layer } 

To create an Earth Engine layer, choose the desired layer from the **Add
layer** selection. This opens the layer configuration dialog.

1.  Na aba **DADOS**:

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_ee_layer_dialog_DATA.png)

    - For "population age groups" you can select the age/gender **groups**
      you would like to include when aggregating the data.

    - Select the **aggregation methods** you would like to use when calculating
      values for the selected organisation units.

      - **Sum**: Calculates the total number within each organisation unit.
        Recommended to use for the population layers.

      - **Min**: Returns the minimum value in the layer unit displayed below the
        selection. For population layers it will be the minimum _people per
        hectar_. For elevation layer it will return the lowest elevation (meters
        above sea level).

      - **Max**: Returns the maximum value in the layer unit. For population
        layers it will be the minimum _people per hectar_. For elevation layer it
        will return the highest elevation for each organisation unit.

      - **Mean**: Returns the mean value in the layer unit. For population layers
        it will be the mean _people per hectar_. For precipitation layer it will
        be the mean rainfall in millimeters across the organisation unit.

      - **Median**: Returns the mean value in the layer unit. For population layers
        it will be the median _people per hectar_. For temperature layer it will
        be the median °C during daytime for the organisation unit.

      - **Standard deviation**: Returns the standard deviation value in the layer
        unit.

      - **Variância**: Retorna o valor da variação na unidade da camada.

2.  Na aba **PERÍODO**

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_ee_layer_dialog_PERIOD.png)

    - Select the period for the data source. The available periods are set by
      data provider. There is only one period for the "population age groups" layer,
      while the "population" layer has yearly data available from 2000 and onwards.
      Precipitation data is available in 5 days periods, and temperature data for
      8 days periods.

3.  Na aba **ORG UNITS**:

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_ee_layer_dialog_ORG_UNITS.png)

    - Select the organisation units you where you want to see aggregated data values.
      It is possible to select either

      - One or more specific organisation units, organisation unit levels in
        the hierarchy, organisation unit groups, or

      - A relative level in the organisation unit hierarchy, with
        respect to the user. By selecting a **User organisation
        unit** the map data will appear differently for users at
        different levels in the organisation unit hierarchy.

    - **Use associated geometry**: This dropdown will only show if there
      are any additional geometry available for your organisation units.
      This is typically used to calculate values for facility catchment areas.

    - **Building footprints**: Building counts are only available for smaller
      organisation unit areas.

4.  Na aba **ESTILO**

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_ee_layer_dialog_STYLE.png)

    - Modifique os parâmetros específicos do tipo de camada.

    - Ajuste o intervalo da legenda, etapas e cores, conforme desejado.

    - If you select organisation units having a single point coordinate
      (facilities) you can set a radius buffer to calculate the
      data value within. A radius of 5000 meters will aggregate all
      values available within a 5 km distance from a facility. Buffer
      option is not available if associated geometry is used.

5.  Clique em **ADICIONAR CAMADA**.

Click on the map regions or facilities to see the aggregation result for that
organisation unit.

### Listing of data values { #listing-of-data-values } 

Earth Engine layers have a **data table** option that can be toggled on or
off from the layer card.

![](resources/images/maps/maps_ee_layer_data_table.png)

The data table displays all the aggregated values for the organisation units selected.

- clicking on a title will sort the table based on that column;
  toggling between ascending and descending.

- entering text or expressions into the filter fields below the titles
  will apply those filters to the data, and the display will adjust
  according to the filter. The filters are applied as follows:

- NOME

  filter by org unit name containing the given text

- ID

  filter by event IDs containing the given text

- MODELO

  filtrar por tipos de exibição GIS contendo o texto dado

- AGGREGATION VALUES

  there is one column for each of the aggregation types selected

  numeric data values can be filtered by given numbers, and/or ranges,
  for example: 2,\>3&\<8

> **Nota**
>
> Os filtros da tabela de dados são temporários e não são salvos com as camadas do mapa.

## Adicionar camadas de mapa externas { #using_maps_external_map_layers }

![](resources/images/maps/maps_terrain_imagery.png)

As camadas externas do mapa são representadas como:

- Mapas base

  These are available in the **basemap** card in the layers panel and
  are selected as any other basemap.

- Sobreposições

  These are available in the **Add layer** selection. Unlike basemaps,
  overlays can be placed above or below any other overlay layers.

Overlay layers are represented by additional layer _cards_ in the layer
panel such as:

Ao longo da parte superior do cartão de sobreposição, da esquerda para a direita:

- Um campo de captura para permitir arrastar e reordenar as camadas com o mouse

- O título da camada externa do mapa

- Um símbolo de seta para recolher e expandir a secção de sobreposição

No meio da secção há uma legenda, se a camada tiver uma.

Ao longo da parte inferior da secção de sobreposição, da esquerda para a direita:

- Um controle deslizante para modificar a transparência da camada

- A delete (trash can) icon to remove the layer from the current
  thematic map.

## Organisation unit profile { #using_maps_org_unit_profile }

![](resources/images/maps/maps_org_unit_profile.png)

The organisation unit profile shows detailed information about
each organisation unit. You can open the profile from org unit, facility
and thematic layers.

You can open the organisation unit profile in three ways:

1. Click on any of the organisasjon units shown on the map, and click
   the **View profile** button in the popup.

2. Right-click one of the organisation units on the map, and select **View profile**
   from the menu.

3. Click on an organisation unit row in the **data table**.

The profile will show on the right side of the map. The profile contents is
set by the system administrator.

## Menu de arquivo { #using_maps_file_menu }

![](resources/images/maps/maps_file_menu.png)

Use the **File menu** to manage your maps. Several menu items will be
disabled until you open or save a map.

Saving your maps makes it easy to restore them later. It also gives you
the opportunity to share them with other users as an interpretation or
put it on the dashboard. You can save all types of layer configurations
as a favorite.

### Crie um novo mapa { #create-a-new-map } 

Clique em **Arquivo** \> **Novo**.

NB \! Isso limpará as camadas de mapa atuais que tem sem salvar.

### Abra um novo mapa { #open-a-new-map } 

1.  Clique em **Arquivo** \> **Abrir**. Uma caixa de diálogo é aberta com uma lista de mapas.

2.  Find the favorite you want to open. You can either use \< and \> or
    the search field to find a saved map. The list is filtered on every
    character that you enter. You can filter the list by selecting
    **Show all**, **Created by me** or **Created by others**.

3.  Clique no nome do mapa que deseja abrir.

### Salvar um mapa { #save-a-map } 

Depois de criar um mapa, é conveniente salvá-lo para uso posterior:

1.  Clique em **Arquivo** \> **Salvar**.

2.  Enter a **Name** (required) and a **Description** (optional) the
    first time you save a map.

3.  Clique em **SALVAR**.

### Salvar uma cópia de um mapa { #save-a-copy-of-a-map } 

1.  Clique em **Arquivo** \> **Salvar como ...**

2.  Enter a **Name** (required) and a **Description** (optional) for the
    map.

3.  Clique em **SALVAR**.

### Renomear um mapa { #rename-a-map } 

1.  Clique em **Arquivo** \> **Renomear**.

2.  Insira um novo **Nome** e / ou **Descrição** para seu mapa.

3.  Clique em **RENOMEAR**. O mapa é atualizado.

### Traduzir um mapa { #translate-a-map } 

1.  Clique em **Arquivo** \> **Traduzir**.

2.  Selecione o **Local** (idioma) de sua tradução.

3.  Enter a translated **Name** and **Description**. The original text
    will show below the field.

4.  Clique em **SALVAR**.

### Modificar as configurações de compartilhamento de um mapa { #modify-sharing-settings-for-a-map } 

After you have created a map and saved it, you can share the map with
everyone or a user group. To modify the sharing settings:

1.  Clique em **Arquivo** \> **Partilhar**. A caixa de diálogo de configurações de partilha é aberta.

2.  **Give access to a user or group**: In the text box, search for the name of the
    user or group you want to share your favorite with and select it.

    Select the access level and click on **Give access**.

    Repeat the step to add more users or groups.

3.  **Users and groups that currently have access**: For each user or group, choose the
    access level. The options are:

    - No access: The public won't have access to the map. This setting is only applicable to All users.

    - Apenas ver

    - Ver e editar

    - Remove access: Remove the access for groups or individuals.

4.  Click **Close** to close the dialog.

### Obtenha o link para um mapa { #get-the-link-to-a-map } 

1.  Clique em **Arquivo** \> **Obter link**. Uma caixa de diálogo de link é aberta.

2.  Copie o link.

### Excluir um mapa { #delete-a-map } 

1.  Clique em **Arquivo** \> **Excluir**. Uma caixa de diálogo de confirmação é exibida.

2.  Click **DELETE** to confirm that you want to delete the favorite.
    Your map is deleted and the layers are cleared from the view.

## Interpretações de mapas { #mapsInterpretation }

An interpretation is a description of a map at a given period. This
information is visible in the **Dashboard app**. Click
**Interpretations** in the top right of the workspace to open the
interpretations panel. The button is only clickable if the map is saved.

![](resources/images/maps/maps_interpretations_panel.png)

### Veja as interpretações com base em períodos relativos { #view-interpretations-based-on-relative-periods } 

Para ver as interpretações de períodos relativos, como um ano atrás:

1.  Abra um favorito com interpretações.

2.  Click **Interpretations** in the top right of the workspace to open
    the interpretations panel.

3.  Click on **See interpretation**. Your map displays the data and the date
    based on when the interpretation was created. To view other
    interpretations, click them.

![](resources/images/maps/maps_interpretations_modal.png)

### Escreva a interpretação para um mapa { #write-interpretation-for-a-map } 

To create an interpretation, you first need to create a map and save it.
If you've shared your map with other people, the interpretation you
write is visible to those people.

1.  Open a saved map.

2.  Click **Interpretations** in the top right of the workspace to open
    the interpretations panel.

3.  A text field will appear with a placeholder "Write an interpretation" for users
    that have read access to the favorite.

4.  In the text field, type a comment, question or interpretation. You
    can also mention other users with '@username'. Start by typing '@'
    plus the first letters of the username or real name and a mentioning
    bar will display the available users. Mentioned users will receive
    an internal DHIS2 message with the interpretation or comment. You
    can see the interpretation in the **Dashboard app**.

5.  Click **Post interpretation** to save the interpretation.

### Alterar as configurações de compartilhamento para uma interpretação { #change-sharing-settings-for-an-interpretation } 

1.  Clique em uma interpretação (veja como ver uma interpretação acima).

2.  Click the share icon below the interpretation. The sharing settings
    dialog opens.

3.  Search for and add a users and user groups that you want to share
    your map with, and set the access level. Click on **Give access**.

4.  Change the access level for the users you want to modify:

    - **View and edit**: Everyone can view and edit the object.

    - **View only**: Everyone can view the object.

    - **No access**: The public won't have access to the object. This
      setting is only applicable to All users.

    - **Remove access**: Remove the access for groups or individuals.

5.  Clique em **FECHAR** quando as configurações de partilha forem atualizadas.

![](resources/images/maps/maps_interpretations_sharing.png)

## Salvar um mapa como uma imagem { #using_maps_image_export }

Pode baixar seu mapa como uma imagem ao clicar no botão Descarregar no menu superior

![](resources/images/maps/maps_download.png)

Map download is not supported in Internet Explorer or Safari, we recommend to
use Google Chrome or Firefox.

1.  Select if you want to include the map name or not. This option is only
    available if the map is saved.

2.  Select if you want to include the map legend. You can position the legend
    in one of the 4 corners of your map.

3.  Clique em **Descarregar** para baixar seu mapa.

## Procure um local { #using_maps_search }

The place search function allows you to search for almost any location
or address. This function is useful in order to locate for example
sites, facilities, villages or towns on the map.

![](resources/images/maps/maps_place_search.png)

1.  No lado direito da janela Mapas, clique no ícone da lupa.

2.  Digite o local que está a procurar.

    Uma lista de locais correspondentes aparece conforme digita.

3.  From the list, select a location. A pin indicates the location on
    the map.

## Medir distâncias e áreas em um mapa { #using_maps_measure_distance }

1.  In the upper left part of the map, put the cursor on the **Measure
    distances and areas** (ruler) icon and click **Create new
    measurement**.

2.  Adicione pontos ao mapa.

3.  Clique em **Concluir medição**.

![](resources/images/maps/maps_measure_distance.png)

## Obtenha a latitude e longitude em qualquer local { #using_maps_latitude_longitude }

Right-click a point on the map and select **Show longitude/latitude**.
The values display in a pop-up window.

## Veja também { #see-also } 

- [Manage
  legends](https://docs.dhis2.org/master/en/user/html/manage_legend.html)



# Analise dados em tabelas dinâmicas { #pivot } 

## Sobre o aplicativo Pivot Table { #pivot_about } 

With the **Pivot Table** app, you can create pivot tables based on all
available data dimensions in DHIS2. A pivot table is a dynamic tool for
data analysis which lets you summarize and arrange data according to its
dimensions. Examples of data dimensions in DHIS2 are:

  - data dimension itself (for example data elements, indicators and
    events)

  - períodos (representando o período de tempo para os dados)

  - organisation hierarchy (representing the geographical location of
    the data)

From these dimensions you can freely select *dimension items* to include
in the pivot table. You can create additional dimensions in DHIS2 with
the group set functionality. This allows for different aggregation
pathways, such as aggregation by "Partner" or facility type.

A pivot table can arrange data dimensions on *columns*, *rows*, and as
*filters*. When you place a data dimension on columns, the pivot table
will display one column per dimension item. If you place multiple data
dimensions on columns, the pivot table displays one column for all
combinations of the items in the selected dimensions. When you place a
data dimension on rows, the pivot table displays one row per dimension
item in a similar fashion. The dimensions you select as filters will not
be included in the pivot table, but will aggregate and filter the table
data based on the selected filter items.

> **Tip**
>
>   - You must select at least one dimension on columns or rows.
>
>   - You must include at least one period.
>
>   - Data element group sets and reporting rates can't appear in the
>     same pivot table.
>
>   - A pivot table can't contain more than the maximum number of
>     analytic records which have been specified in the system settings.
>     The maximum number of records could also be constrained by the
>     maximum RAM which is available to your browser. You will be
>     prompted with a warning if your requested table exceeds a
>     particular size. From this prompt, you can either cancel the
>     request or continue building the table. Consider making smaller
>     tables instead of one table which displays all of your data
>     elements and indicators together.
>
>   - The **Pivot Table** app supports drill-down and up for periods and
>     organisation unit. This means that you can for example drill down
>     from yearly periods to quarters, months and weeks inside a pivot
>     table. You can also drill down from the global organisation unit
>     to countries, provinces and facilities.

## Crie uma tabela dinâmica { #pivot_create } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Pivot Table **.

2.  In the menu to the left, select the dimension items you want to
    analyse, for example data elements or indicators.

3.  Click **Layout** and arrange the data dimensions as columns, rows
    and filters.

    Você pode manter a seleção padrão, se desejar.

4.  Clique em ** Actualizar **.

Neste exemplo, os indicadores são listados como colunas e os períodos como linhas.

![](resources/images/pivot_table/basic_pivot.png)

### Selecione os itens de dimensão { #select-dimension-items } 

The left menu lists sections for all available data dimensions. From
each section you can select any number of dimension items. As an
example, you can open the section for data elements and select any
number of data elements from the available list. You can select an item
by marking it and clicking on the arrow in the section header or simply
double-clicking on the item. Before you can use a data dimension in your
pivot table you must at least select one dimension item. If you arrange
a dimension as columns or rows but do not select any dimension items,
the dimension is ignored.

You must choose at least one data dimension type to create a pivot
table. The available types are described in this table:



Table: Data dimension types

| Data dimension type | Definition | Exemplos |
|---|---|---|
| Indicadores | An indicator is a calculated formula based on data elements. | Coverage of immunization across a specific district. |
| Elementos de dados | Represents the phenomenon for which data has been captured. | Number of malaria cases; number of BCG doses given. |
| Conjuntos de dados | A collection of data elements grouped for data collection. You can select : <br> * **Reporting rates**: the percentage of actual reports compared to the expected number of reports<br> * **Reporting rates on time**: the reporting rates based on timely form submissions. A timely submission must happen within a number of days after the reporting period.<br> * **Actual reports**: the actual number of reports<br> * **Actual reports on time**: the actual number of reports based on timely form submissions. A timely submission must happen within a number of days after the reporting period.<br> * **Expected reports**: the number of expected reports based on organisation units where the data set and the reporting frequency has been assigned. | Reporting rates for immunization and morbidity forms. |
| Event data items | A data element that is part of a program representing events that have been captured. | Average weight and height for children in a nutrition program. |
| Indicadores de programa | A calculated formula based on data elements in a program representing events. | Average BMI score for children in a nutrition program. |

You can combine these dimensions to display for example aggregate data
with reporting rates, or event data items together with program
indicators, all in the same pivot tables. For the "data element" data
dimension, you are also able to select "Totals" and "Details", which
will allow you to view different category combination options together
on the same pivot table.

For the period dimension you can choose between using fixed periods or
relative periods. An example of a fixed period is "January 2012". To
select fixed periods start by selecting a period type from the period
type list. You can then select periods from the list of available
periods.

Relative periods are periods relative to the current date. Examples of
relative periods are "Last month", "Last 12 months", "Last 5 years".
Relative periods can be selected by ticking the check-boxes next to each
period. The main advantage of using relative periods is that when you
save a pivot table favorite, it will stay updated with the latest data
as time goes by without the need for constantly updating it.

For the organisation unit dimension you can select any number of
organisation units from the hierarchy. To select all organisation units
below a specific parent organisation unit, right click and click "Select
all children". To manually select multiple organisation units, click and
hold the **Ctrl** key while clicking on organisation units. You can tick
"User org unit", "User sub-units" or "User sub-x2-units" in order to
dynamically insert the organisation unit or units associated with your
user account. This is useful when you save a pivot table favorite and
want to share it with other users, as the organisation units linked with
the other user's account will be used when viewing the favorite.


![](resources/images/pivot_table/period_dimension.png)

Dynamic dimensions can consist of organisation unit group sets, data
element group sets, or category option group sets which have been
configured with the type of "Disaggregation". Once the group sets have
been configured, they will be come available in the pivot tables, and
can be used as additional analysis dimensions, for instance to analyse
aggregate data by Type of organisation unit or Implementing partner.
Dynamic dimensions work the same as fixed dimensions.

> **Tip**
>
> Some dynamic dimensions may contain many items. This can cause issues
> with certain browsers due to the length of the URL when many dimension
> members are selected. A special "All" check box is available for
> dynamic dimensions, which allows you to include all available
> dimensions implicitly in your pivot table, without specifying each and
> every dimension member.

### Modificar o layout da tabela dinâmica { #modify-pivot-table-layout } 

After selecting data dimensions it is time to arrange your pivot table.
Click "Layout" in the top menu to open the layout screen. In this screen
you can position your data dimensions as table columns, rows or filters
by clicking and dragging the dimensions from the dimensions list to the
respective column, row and filter lists. You can set any number of
dimensions in any of the lists. For instance, you can click on
"Organisation units" and drag it to the row list in order to position
the organisation unit dimension as table rows. Note that indicators,
data elements and data set reporting rates are part of the common "Data"
dimension and will be displayed together in the pivot table. For
instance, after selecting indicators and data elements in the left menu,
you can drag "Organisation Unit" from the available dimensions list to
the row dimension list in order to arrange them as rows in the pivot
table.


![](resources/images/pivot_table/table_layout.png)

After you have set up your pivot table you can click "Update" to render
your pivot table, or click "Hide" to hide the layout screen without any
changes taking effect. Since we in our example have selected both the
period and organisation unit dimension as rows, the pivot table will
generate all combinations of the items in these dimensions and produce a
table like this:

![](resources/images/pivot_table/pivot_rows.png)

## Alterar a exibição de sua tabela dinâmica { #pivot_change_display } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Pivot Table **.

2.  Crie uma nova tabela dinâmica ou abra uma favorita.

3.  Clique em ** Opções **.

4.  Defina as opções conforme necessário.



    Table: Pivot table options

    || Option | Description |
    |---|---|---|
    | **Data** | **Show column totals**<br>     <br>**Show row totals** | Displays total values in the table for each row and column, as well as a total for all values in the table. |
    || **Show column sub-totals**<br>     <br>**Show row sub-totals** | Displays subtotals in the table for each dimension.<br>     <br>If you only select one dimension, subtotals will be hidden for those columns or rows. This is because the values will be equal to the subtotals. |
    || **Show dimension labels** | Shows the dimension names as part of the pivot tables. |
    || **Hide empty rows** | Hides empty rows from the table. This is useful when you look at large tables where a big part of the dimension items don't have data in order to keep the table more readable. |
    || **Hide empty columns** | Hides empty columns from the table. This is useful when you look at large tables where a big part of the dimension items don't have data in order to keep the table more readable. |
    || **Skip rounding** | Skips the rounding of data values, offering the full precision of data values. Can be useful for finance data where the full dollar amount is required. |
    || **Aggregation type** | The default aggregation operator can be over-ridden here, by selecting a different aggregation operator. Some of the aggregation types are **Count**, **Min** and **Max**. |
    || **Number type** | Sets the type of value you want to display in the pivot table: **Value**, **Percentage of row** or **Percentage of column**.<br>     <br>The options **Percentage of row** and**Percentage of column** mean that you'll display values as percentages of row total or percentage of column total instead of the aggregated value. This is useful when you want to see the contribution of data elements, categories or organisation units to the total value. |
    || **Measure criteria** | Allows for the data to be filtered on the server side.<br>     <br>You can instruct the system to return only records where the aggregated data value is equal, greater than, greater or equal, less than or less or equal to certain values.<br>     <br>If both parts of the filter are used, it's possible to filter out a range of data records. |
    | **Events** | **Include only completed events** | Includes only completed events in the aggregation process. This is useful for example to exclude partial events in indicator calculations. |
    | **Organisation units** | **Show hierarchy** | Shows the name of all ancestors for organisation units, for example "Sierra Leone / Bombali / Tamabaka / Sanya CHP" for Sanya CHP.<br>     <br>The organisation units are then sorted alphabetically which will order the organisation units according to the hierarchy.<br>     <br>When you download a pivot table with organisation units as rows and you've selected **Show hierarchy**, each organisation unit level is rendered as a separate column. This is useful for example when you create Excel pivot tables on a local computer. |
    | **Legend** | **Apply legend** | Applies a legend to the values. This mean that you can apply a colour to the values.<br>     <br>Select **By data item** to color the table cells individually according to each data element or indicator.<br>     <br>You configure legends in the **Maintenance** app. |
    || **Style** | Colors the text or background of cells in pivot tables based on the selected legend.<br>     <br>You can use this option for scorecards to identify high and low values at a glance. |
    | **Style** | **Display density** | Controls the size of the cells in the table. You can set it to **Comfortable**, **Normal** or **Compact**.<br>     <br>**Compact** is useful when you want to fit large tables into the browser screen. |
    || **Font size** | Controls the size of the table text font. You can set it to **Large**, **Normal** or **Small**. |
    || **Digit group separator** | Controls which character to separate groups of digits or "thousands". You can set it to **Comma**, **Space** or **None**. |
    | **General** | **Table title** | Type a title here to display it above the table. |
    | **Parameters (for standard reports only)** |     **Note** <br>    You create standard reports in the **Reports** app. <br>    In the **Pivot Table** app you set which parameters the system should prompt the user for. ||
    || **Reporting period** | Controls whether to ask user to enter a report period. |
    || **Organisation unit** | Controls whether to ask user to enter an organisation unit. |
    || **Parent organisation unit** | Controls whether to ask user to enter a parent organisation unit. |
    || **Include regression** | Includes a column with regression values to the pivot table. |
    || **Include cumulative** | Includes a column with cumulative values to the pivot table. |
    || **Sort order** | Controls the sort order of the values. |
    || **Top limit** | Controls the maximum number of rows to include in the pivot table. |

5.  Clique em ** Actualizar **.

## Gerenciar favoritos { #manage-favorites } 

Saving your charts or pivot tables as favorites makes it easy to find
them later. You can also choose to share them with other users as an
interpretation or display them on the dashboard.

You view the details and interpretations of your favorites in the
**Pivot Table**, **Data Visualizer**, **Event Visualizer**, **Event
Reports** apps. Use the **Favorites** menu to manage your favorites.

### Abra um favorito { #open-a-favorite } 

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Abrir **.

2.  Enter the name of a favorite in the search field, or click **Prev**
    and **Next** to display favorites.

3.  Clique no nome do favorito que deseja abrir.

### Salvar um favorito { #save-a-favorite } 

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Salvar como **.

2.  Insira um ** Nome ** e uma ** Descrição ** para seu favorito. O campo de descrição oferece suporte a um formato de rich text, consulte a seção de interpretações para obter mais detalhes.

3.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Renomear um favorito { #rename-a-favorite } 

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Renomear **.

2.  Digite o novo nome do seu favorito.

3.  Clique em ** Actualizar **.

### Escreva uma interpretação para um favorito { #write-an-interpretation-for-a-favorite } 

An interpretation is a link to a resource with a description of the data
at a given period. This information is visible in the **Dashboard** app.
To create an interpretation, you first need to create a favorite. If
you've shared your favorite with other people, the interpretation you
write is visible to those people.

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Interpretação de gravação **.

2.  In the text field, type a comment, question or interpretation. You
    can also mention other users with '@username'. Start by typing '@'
    plus the first letters of the username or real name and a mentioning
    bar will display the available users. Mentioned users will receive
    an internal DHIS2 message with the interpretation or comment. You
    can see the interpretation in the **Dashboard** app.

    It is possible to format the text with **bold**, *italic* by using the
    Markdown style markers \* and \_ for **bold** and *italic* respectively.
    Keyboard shortcuts are also available: Ctrl/Cmd + B and Ctrl/Cmd + I. A
    limited set of smilies is supported and can be used by typing one of the
    following character combinations: :) :-) :( :-( :+1 :-1. URLs are
    automatically detected and converted into a clickable link.

3.  Search for a user group that you want to share your favorite with,
    then click the **+** icon.

4.  Altere as configurações de compartilhamento para os grupos de usuários que deseja modificar.

      - **Pode editar e visualizar**: todos podem visualizar e editar o objeto.

      - **Pode visualizar apenas**: Todos podem visualizar o objeto.

      - **None**: The public won't have access to the object. This
        setting is only applicable to **Public access**.

5.  Clique em ** Compartilhar **.

### Inscreva-se em um favorito { #subscribe-to-a-favorite } 

When you are subscribed to a favorite, you receive internal messages
whenever another user likes/creates/updates an interpretation or
creates/update an interpretation comment of this favorite.

1.  Abra um favorito.

2.  Clique em ** \> \> \> ** no canto superior direito da área de trabalho.

3.  Clique no ícone de sino superior direito para se inscrever neste favorito.

### Crie um link para um favorito { #create-a-link-to-a-favorite } 

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Obter link **.

2.  Selecione um dos seguintes:

      - **Open in this app**: You get a URL for the favorite which you
        can share with other users by email or chat.

      - **Open in web api**: You get a URL of the API resource. By
        default this is an HTML resource, but you can change the file
        extension to ".json" or ".csv".

### Excluir um favorito { #delete-a-favorite } 

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Excluir **.

2.  Clique **OK**.

### Veja as interpretações com base em períodos relativos { #view-interpretations-based-on-relative-periods } 

Para ver as interpretações de períodos relativos, como um ano atrás:

1.  Abra um favorito com interpretações.

2.  Clique em ** \> \> \> ** no canto superior direito da área de trabalho.

3.  Click an interpretation. Your chart displays the data and the date
    based on when the interpretation was created.To view other
    interpretations, click them.

## Baixar dados de uma tabela dinâmica { #pivot_download_data } 

### Baixar formato de dados de layout de tabela { #download-table-layout-data-format } 

Para fazer download dos dados na tabela dinâmica atual:

1.  Clique em ** Download **.

2.  Under **Table layout**, click the format you want to download:
    Microsoft Excel, CSV or HTML.

    The data table will have one column per dimension and contain names
    of the dimension items.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > When you download a pivot table with organisation units as rows
    > and you've selected **Show hierarchy** in **Table options**, each
    > organisation unit level is rendered as a separate column. This is
    > useful for example when you create Excel pivot tables on a local
    > computer.

> **Tip**
>
> You can create a pivot table in Microsoft Excel from the downloaded
> Excel file.

### Baixe o formato de fonte de dados simples { #download-plain-data-source-format } 

You can download data in the current pivot table in JSON, XML, Excel,
and CSV as plain data formats with different identification schemes (ID,
Code, and Name). The data document uses identifiers of the dimension
items and opens in a new browser window to display the URL of the
request to the Web API in the address bar. This is useful for developers
of apps and other client modules based on the DHIS2 Web API or for those
who require a plan data source, for instance for import into statistical
packages.

Para baixar formatos de fonte de dados simples:

1.  Clique em ** Download **.

2.  Em ** Fonte de dados simples **, clique no formato que deseja baixar.



    Table: Available formats

    | Format | Action | Description |
    |---|---|---|
    | JSON | Click **JSON** | Downloads JSON format based on ID property.<br>     <br>You can also download JSON format based on **Code** or **Name** property. |
    | XML | Click **XML** | Downloads XML format based on ID property.<br>     <br>You can also download XML format based on **Code** or **Name** property. |
    | Microsoft Excel | Click **Microsoft Excel** | Downloads XML format based on ID property.<br>     <br>You can also download Microsoft Excel format based on **Code** or **Name** property. |
    | CSV | Click **CSV** | Downloads CSV format based on ID property.<br>     <br>You can also download CSV format based on **Code** or **Name** property. |
    | JRXML | Put the cursor on **Advanced** and click **JRXML** | Produces a template of a Jasper Report which can be further customized based on your exact needs and used as the basis for a standard report in DHIS2. |
    | Raw data SQL | Put the cursor on **Advanced** and click **Raw data SQL** | Provides the actual SQL statement used to generate the pivot table. You can use it as a data source in a Jasper report, or as the basis for an SQL view. |

### Baixe um formato CSV sem renderizar dados no navegador da web { #download-a-csv-format-without-rendering-data-in-the-web-browser } 

You can download data in CSV format directly without rendering the data
in the web browser. This helps to reduce any constraints in the system
settings that has been set with regards to the maximum number of
analytic records. This lets you download much larger batches of data
that you can use for later offline analysis.

To download data in CSV format without first rendering data in the web
browser:

1.  Clique na seta ao lado de ** Atualizar **.

    ![](resources/images/pivot_table/data_dump.png)

2.  Clique em ** CSV ** para baixar o formato baseado na propriedade ID.

    O arquivo é baixado para o seu computador.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > You can also download CSV format based on **Code** or **Name**
    > property.

## Incorporar uma tabela dinâmica em uma página da web externa { #pivot_embed } 

Certain analysis-related resources in DHIS2, like pivot tables, charts
and maps, can be embedded in any web page by using a plug-in. You will
find more information about the plug-ins in the Web API chapter in the
*DHIS2 Developer Manual*.

To generate a HTML fragment that you can use to display the pivot table
in an external web page:

1.  Clique em ** Incorporar **.

2.  Clique em ** Selecionar ** para destacar o fragmento HTML.

## Visualize os dados da tabela dinâmica como um gráfico ou mapa { #pivot_integration } 

When you have made a pivot table you can switch between pivot table,
chart and map visualization of your data.

### Abra uma tabela dinâmica como um gráfico { #open-a-pivot-table-as-a-chart } 

1.  Clique em ** Gráfico ** \> ** Abrir esta tabela como gráfico **.

    Sua tabela dinâmica atual é aberta como um gráfico.


![](resources/images/pivot_table/pivot_integration.png)

### Abra uma seleção de tabela dinâmica como um gráfico { #open-a-pivot-table-selection-as-a-chart } 

If you want to visualize a small part of your pivot table as a chart you
can click directly on a value in the table instead opening the whole
table.

1.  Na tabela dinâmica, clique em um valor.


    ![](resources/images/pivot_table/pivot_integration_table.png)

2.  To verify the selection, hold the cursor over **Open selection as
    chart**. The highlighted dimension headers in the table indicate
    what data will be visualized as a chart.

3.  Clique em ** Abrir seleção como gráfico **.

### Abra uma tabela dinâmica como um mapa { #open-a-pivot-table-as-a-map } 

1.  Clique em ** Chart ** \> ** Open this table as map **

    Sua tabela dinâmica atual é aberta como um mapa.

### Abra uma seleção de tabela dinâmica como um mapa { #open-a-pivot-table-selection-as-a-map } 

1.  Na tabela dinâmica, clique em um valor.

    Um menu é exibido.

2.  Clique em ** Abrir seleção como mapa **.

    Sua seleção é aberta como um mapa.



# Usando o aplicativo Relatórios de eventos { #event_reports_app } 

## Sobre o aplicativo Relatórios de Eventos { #event_reports_about } 


![](resources/images/event_report/event_report.png)

With the **Event Reports** app you can analyse events in two types of
reports:

  - Aggregated event reports: Pivot table-style analysis with aggregated
    numbers of events

    By selecting **Aggregated values** from the top-left menu you can
    use the **Event Reports** app to create pivot tables with aggregated
    numbers of events. An event report is always based on a program. You
    can do analysis based on a range of dimensions. Each dimension can
    have a corresponding filter. Dimensions can be selected from the
    left-side menu. Similar to the pivot tables app, aggregated event
    reports may be limited by the amount of RAM accessible by the
    browser. If your requested table exceeds a set size, you will
    recieve a warning prompt asking whether or not you want to continue.

  - Relatórios de eventos individuais: listas de eventos

    By selecting **Events** from the top-left menu you can use the
    **Event Reports** app to make searches or queries for events based
    on a flexible set of criteria. The report will be displayed as a
    table with one row per event. Each dimension can be used as a column
    in the table or as a filter. Each dimension can have a criteria
    (filter). Data elements of type option set allows for "in" criteria,
    where multiple options can be selected. Numeric values can be
    compared to filter values using greater than, equal or less than
    operators.

## Crie um relatório de evento { #event_reports_create } 

1.  Abra o aplicativo ** Relatórios de eventos **.

2.  Selecione ** Valores agregados ** ou ** Eventos **.

3.  No menu à esquerda, selecione os metadados que deseja analisar.

4.  Clique em ** Layout ** e organize as dimensões.

    Você pode manter a seleção padrão, se desejar.

5.  Clique em ** Actualizar **.

## Selecione os itens de dimensão { #event_reports_select_dimensions } 

An event report is always based on a program and you can do analysis
based on a range of dimensions. For programs with category combinations,
you can use program categories and category option group sets as
dimensions for tables and charts. Each dimension item can have a
corresponding filter.

1.  Selecione os elementos de dados:

    1.  Clique em ** Dados **.

    2.  Selecione um programa e uma fase do programa.

        The data elements associated with the selected program are
        listed under **Available**. Each data element acts as a
        dimension.

    3.  Select the data elements you need by double-clicking their
        names.

        Data elements can be filtered by type (Data elements, Program
        attributes, Program indicators) and are prefixed to make them
        easily recognizable.

        After selecting a data element, it is visible under **Selected
        data items**.

    4.  (Optional) For each data element, specify a filter with
        operators such as "greater than", "in" or "equal" together with
        a filter value.

2.  Selecione os períodos.

    1.  Clique em ** Períodos **.

    2.  Selecione um ou vários períodos.

        You have three period options: relative periods, fixed periods
        and start/end dates. You can combine fixed periods and relative
        periods in the same chart. You cannot combine fixed periods and
        relative periods with start/end dates in the same chart.
        Overlapping periods are filtered so that they only appear once.

          - Fixed periods: In the **Select period type** box, select a
            period type. You can select any number of fixed periods from
            any period type. Fixed periods can for example be "January
            2014".

          - Relative periods: In the lower part of the **Periods**
            section, select as many relative periods as you like. The
            names are relative to the current date. This means that if
            the current month is March and you select **Last month**,
            the month of February is included in the chart. Relative
            periods has the advantage that it keeps the data in the
            report up to date as time goes.

          - Start/end dates: In the list under the **Periods** tab,
            select **Start/end dates**. This period type lets you
            specify flexible dates for the time span in the report.

3.  Selecione unidades de organização.

    1.  Clique em ** Unidades organizacionais **.

    2.  Clique no ícone da caixa de engrenagens.

    3.  Selecione um ** Modo de seleção ** e uma unidade organizacional.

        Existem três modos de seleção diferentes:



        Table: Selection modes

        | Selection mode | Description |
        |---|---|
        | **Select organisation units** | Lets you select the organisation units you want to appear in the chart from the organization tree.<br>         <br>Select **User org unit** to disable the organisation unit tree and only select the organisation unit that is related to your profile.<br>         <br>Select **User sub-units** to disable the organisation unit tree and only select the sub-units of the organisation unit that is related to your profile.<br>         <br>Select **User sub-x2-units** to disable the organisation unit tree and only select organisation units two levels down from the organisation unit that is related to your profile.<br>         <br>This functionality is useful for administrators to create a meaningful "system" favorite. With this option checked all users find their respective organisation unit when they open the favorite. |
        | **Select levels** | Lets you select all organisation units at one or more levels, for example national or district level.<br>         <br>You can also select the parent organisation unit in the tree, which makes it easy to select for example, all facilities inside one or more districts. |
        | **Select groups** | Lets you select all organisation units inside one or several groups and parent organisation units at the same time, for example hospitals or chiefdoms. |

4.  Clique em ** Actualizar **.

## Selecione série, categoria e filtro { #event_reports_select_series_category_filter } 

You can define which data dimension you want to appear as columns, rows
and filters in the pivot table. Each data element appears as individual
dimensions and can be placed on any of the axes.

> **Note**
>
> Data elements of continuous value types (real numbers/decimal numbers)
> can only be used as filters, and will automatically be positioned as
> filters in the layout dialog. The reason for this is that continuous
> number cannot be grouped into sensible ranges and used on columns and
> rows.

1.  Clique em ** Layout **.

2.  Arraste e solte as dimensões no espaço apropriado.

3.  Clique em ** Actualizar **.

## Mude a exibição de sua mesa { #event_reports_change_display } 

Você pode personalizar a exibição de um relatório de evento.

1.  Clique em ** Opções **.

2.  Set the options as required. Available options are different between
    aggregated event reports and individual event reports.



    Table: Event reports options

    || Option | Description | Available for report type |
    |---|---|---|---|
    | **Data** | **Show column totals** | Displays totals at the end of each column in the pivot table. | Aggregated event report |
    || **Show column sub-totals** | Displays sub-totals for each column in the pivot table. | Aggregated event report |
    || **Show row totals** | Displays totals at the end of each row in the pivot table. | Aggregated event report |
    || **Show row sub-totals** | Displays sub-totals for each row in the pivot table. | Aggregated event report |
    || **Show dimension labels** | Displays labels for dimensions. | Aggregated event report |
    || **Hide empty rows** | Hides empty rows in the pivot table. | Aggregated event report |
    || **Hide n/a data** | Hides data tagged as N/A from the chart. | Aggregated event report |
    || **Include only completed events** | Includes only completed events in the aggregation process. This is useful when you want for example to exclude partial events in indicator calculations. | Aggregated event report<br>     <br>Individual event report |
    || **Limit** | Sets a limit of the maximum number of rows that you can display in the table, combined with a setting for showing top or bottom values. | Aggregated event report |
    || **Output type** | Defines the output type. The output types are **Event**, **Enrollment** and **Tracked entity instance**. | Aggregated event report |
    || **Program status** | Filters data based on the program status: **All**, **Active**, **Completed** or **Cancelled**. | Aggregated event report |
    || **Event status** | Filters data based on the event status: **All**, **Active**, **Completed**, **Scheduled**, **Overdue** or **Skipped**. | Aggregated event report |
    | **Organisation units** | **Show hierarchy** | Includes the names of all parents of each organisation unit in labels. | Aggregated event report |
    | **Style** | **Display density** | Controls the size of the cells in the table. You can set it to **Comfortable**, **Normal** or **Compact**.<br>     <br>**Compact** is useful when you want to fit large tables into the browser screen. | Aggregated event report<br>     <br>Individual event report |
    || **Font size** | Controls the size of the table text font. You can set it to **Large**, **Normal** or **Small**. | Aggregated event report<br>     <br>Individual event report |
    || **Digit group separator** | Controls which character to separate groups of digits or "thousands". You can set it to **Comma**, **Space** or **None**. | Aggregated event report<br>     <br>Individual event report |

3.  Clique em ** Actualizar **.

## Baixar fonte de dados do gráfico { #event_reports_download_report } 

You can download the data source behind an event report in HTML, JSON,
XML, Microsoft Excel or CSV formats.

1.  Clique em ** Download **.

2.  Em ** Fonte de dados simples **, clique no formato que deseja baixar.



    Table: Available formats

    | Format | Description |
    |---|---|
    | HTML | Creates HTML table based on selected meta data |
    | JSON | Downloads data values in JSON format based on selected meta data |
    | XML | Downloads data values in XML format based on selected meta data |
    | Microsoft Excel | Downloads data values in Microsoft Excel format based on selected meta data |
    | CSV | Downloads data values in CSV format based on selected meta data |

## Gerenciar favoritos { #manage-favorites } 

Saving your charts or pivot tables as favorites makes it easy to find
them later. You can also choose to share them with other users as an
interpretation or display them on the dashboard.

You view the details and interpretations of your favorites in the
**Pivot Table**, **Data Visualizer**, **Event Visualizer**, **Event
Reports** apps. Use the **Favorites** menu to manage your favorites.

### Abra um favorito { #open-a-favorite } 

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Abrir **.

2.  Enter the name of a favorite in the search field, or click **Prev**
    and **Next** to display favorites.

3.  Clique no nome do favorito que deseja abrir.

### Salvar um favorito { #save-a-favorite } 

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Salvar como **.

2.  Insira um ** Nome ** e uma ** Descrição ** para seu favorito. O campo de descrição oferece suporte a um formato de rich text, consulte a seção de interpretações para obter mais detalhes.

3.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Renomear um favorito { #rename-a-favorite } 

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Renomear **.

2.  Digite o novo nome do seu favorito.

3.  Clique em ** Actualizar **.

### Escreva uma interpretação para um favorito { #write-an-interpretation-for-a-favorite } 

An interpretation is a link to a resource with a description of the data
at a given period. This information is visible in the **Dashboard** app.
To create an interpretation, you first need to create a favorite. If
you've shared your favorite with other people, the interpretation you
write is visible to those people.

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Interpretação de gravação **.

2.  In the text field, type a comment, question or interpretation. You
    can also mention other users with '@username'. Start by typing '@'
    plus the first letters of the username or real name and a mentioning
    bar will display the available users. Mentioned users will receive
    an internal DHIS2 message with the interpretation or comment. You
    can see the interpretation in the **Dashboard** app.

    It is possible to format the text with **bold**, *italic* by using the
    Markdown style markers \* and \_ for **bold** and *italic* respectively.
    Keyboard shortcuts are also available: Ctrl/Cmd + B and Ctrl/Cmd + I. A
    limited set of smilies is supported and can be used by typing one of the
    following character combinations: :) :-) :( :-( :+1 :-1. URLs are
    automatically detected and converted into a clickable link.

3.  Search for a user group that you want to share your favorite with,
    then click the **+** icon.

4.  Altere as configurações de compartilhamento para os grupos de usuários que deseja modificar.

      - **Pode editar e visualizar**: todos podem visualizar e editar o objeto.

      - **Pode visualizar apenas**: Todos podem visualizar o objeto.

      - **None**: The public won't have access to the object. This
        setting is only applicable to **Public access**.

5.  Clique em ** Compartilhar **.

### Inscreva-se em um favorito { #subscribe-to-a-favorite } 

When you are subscribed to a favorite, you receive internal messages
whenever another user likes/creates/updates an interpretation or
creates/update an interpretation comment of this favorite.

1.  Abra um favorito.

2.  Clique em ** \> \> \> ** no canto superior direito da área de trabalho.

3.  Clique no ícone de sino superior direito para se inscrever neste favorito.

### Crie um link para um favorito { #create-a-link-to-a-favorite } 

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Obter link **.

2.  Selecione um dos seguintes:

      - **Open in this app**: You get a URL for the favorite which you
        can share with other users by email or chat.

      - **Open in web api**: You get a URL of the API resource. By
        default this is an HTML resource, but you can change the file
        extension to ".json" or ".csv".

### Excluir um favorito { #delete-a-favorite } 

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Excluir **.

2.  Clique **OK**.

### Veja as interpretações com base em períodos relativos { #view-interpretations-based-on-relative-periods } 

Para ver as interpretações de períodos relativos, como um ano atrás:

1.  Abra um favorito com interpretações.

2.  Clique em ** \> \> \> ** no canto superior direito da área de trabalho.

3.  Click an interpretation. Your chart displays the data and the date
    based on when the interpretation was created.To view other
    interpretations, click them.

## Visualize um relatório de evento como um gráfico { #event_reports_open_as_chart } 

Depois de fazer um relatório de evento, você pode abri-lo como um gráfico:

Clique em ** Gráfico ** \> ** Abrir este gráfico como tabela **.



# Usando o aplicativo Event Visualizer { #event_visualizer_app } 

## Sobre o aplicativo Event Visualizer { #about-the-event-visualizer-app } 


![](resources/images/event_visualizer/event_visualizer.png)

With the **Event Visualizer** app, you can create charts based on event
data.

## Crie um gráfico { #create-a-chart } 

1.  Open the **Event Visualizer** app and select a chart type.

2.  No menu à esquerda, selecione os metadados que deseja analisar.

3.  Clique em ** Layout ** e organize as dimensões.

    Você pode manter a seleção padrão, se desejar.

4.  Clique em ** Actualizar **.

## Selecione um tipo de gráfico { #select-a-chart-type } 

The **Event Visualizer** app has eight different chart types, each with
different characteristics. To select a chart type:

1.  Em ** Tipo de gráfico **, clique no tipo de gráfico de que você precisa.



    Table: Chart types

    | Chart type | Description |
    |---|---|
    | Column chart | Displays information as vertical rectangular columns with lengths proportional to the values they represent.<br>     <br>Useful when you want to, for example, compare performance of different districts. |
    | Stacked column chart | Displays information as vertical rectangular columns, where bars representing multiple categories are stacked on top of each other.<br>     <br>Useful when you want to, for example, display trends or sums of related data elements. |
    | Bar chart | Same as column chart, only with horizontal bars. |
    | Stacked bar chart | Same as stacked column chart, only with horizontal bars. |
    | Line chart | Displays information as a series of points connected by straight lines. Also referred to as time series.<br>     <br>Useful when you want to, for example, visualize trends in indicator data over multiple time periods. |
    | Area chart | Is based on line chart, with the space between the axis and the line filled with colors and the lines stacked on top of each other.<br>     <br>Useful when you want to compare the trends of related indicators. |
    | Pie chart | Circular chart divided into sectors (or slices).<br>     <br>Useful when you want to, for example, visualize the proportion of data for individual data elements compared to the total sum of all data elements in the chart. |
    | Radar chart | Displays data on axes starting from the same point. Also known as spider chart. |

2.  Clique em ** Actualizar **.

## Selecione os itens de dimensão { #event_visualizer_select_dimensions } 

An event chart is always based on a program and you can do analysis
based on a range of dimensions. For programs with category combinations,
you can use program categories and category option group sets as
dimensions for tables and charts. Each dimension item can have a
corresponding filter. You select dimension items from the left-side
menu.

1.  Selecione os elementos de dados:

    1.  Clique em ** Dados **.

    2.  Selecione um programa e uma fase do programa.

        The data elements associated with the selected program are
        listed under **Available**. Each data element acts as a
        dimension.

    3.  Select the data elements you need by double-clicking their
        names.

        Data elements can be filtered by type (Data elements, Program
        attributes, Program indicators) and are prefixed to make them
        easily recognizable.

        After selecting a data element, it is visible under **Selected
        data items**.

    4.  (Optional) For each data element, specify a filter with
        operators such as "greater than", "in" or "equal" together with
        a filter value.

2.  Selecione os períodos.

    1.  Clique em ** Períodos **.

    2.  Selecione um ou vários períodos.

        You have three period options: relative periods, fixed periods
        and start/end dates. You can combine fixed periods and relative
        periods in the same chart. You cannot combine fixed periods and
        relative periods with start/end dates in the same chart.
        Overlapping periods are filtered so that they only appear once.

          - Fixed periods: In the **Select period type** box, select a
            period type. You can select any number of fixed periods from
            any period type. Fixed periods can for example be "January
            2014".

          - Relative periods: In the lower part of the **Periods**
            section, select as many relative periods as you like. The
            names are relative to the current date. This means that if
            the current month is March and you select **Last month**,
            the month of February is included in the chart. Relative
            periods has the advantage that it keeps the data in the
            report up to date as time goes.

          - Start/end dates: In the list under the **Periods** tab,
            select **Start/end dates**. This period type lets you
            specify flexible dates for the time span in the report.

3.  Selecione unidades de organização.

    1.  Clique em ** Unidades organizacionais **.

    2.  Clique no ícone da caixa de engrenagens.

    3.  Selecione um ** Modo de seleção ** e uma unidade organizacional.

        Existem três modos de seleção diferentes:



        Table: Selection modes

        | Selection mode | Description |
        |---|---|
        | **Select organisation units** | Lets you select the organisation units you want to appear in the chart from the organization tree.<br>         <br>Select **User org unit** to disable the organisation unit tree and only select the organisation unit that is related to your profile.<br>         <br>Select **User sub-units** to disable the organisation unit tree and only select the sub-units of the organisation unit that is related to your profile.<br>         <br>Select **User sub-x2-units** to disable the organisation unit tree and only select organisation units two levels down from the organisation unit that is related to your profile.<br>         <br>This functionality is useful for administrators to create a meaningful "system" favorite. With this option checked all users find their respective organisation unit when they open the favorite. |
        | **Select levels** | Lets you select all organisation units at one or more levels, for example national or district level.<br>         <br>You can also select the parent organisation unit in the tree, which makes it easy to select for example, all facilities inside one or more districts. |
        | **Select groups** | Lets you select all organisation units inside one or several groups and parent organisation units at the same time, for example hospitals or chiefdoms. |

4.  Clique em ** Actualizar **.

## Selecione série, categoria e filtro { #select-series-category-and-filter } 

You can define which data dimension you want to appear as series,
category and filter. Each data element appears as individual dimensions
and can be placed on any of the axes. Series and category panels can
only have one dimension at the time.

> **Note**
> 
> Data elements of continuous value types (real numbers/decimal numbers)
> can only be used as filters, and will automatically be positioned as
> filters in the layout dialog. The reason for this is that continuous
> number cannot be grouped into sensible ranges and used on columns and
> rows.

1.  Clique em ** Layout **.

2.  Drag and drop the dimensions to the appropriate space. Only one
    dimension can be in each section.

3.  Clique em ** Actualizar **.

## Alterar a exibição de seu gráfico { #event_visualizer_change_display } 

Você pode personalizar a exibição de um relatório de evento.

1.  Clique em ** Opções **.

2.  Defina as opções conforme necessário.



    Table: Chart options

    | Option | Description ||
    |---|---|---|
    | **Data** | **Show values** | Displays values as numbers on top of each series. |
    || **Use 100% stacked values** | Displays 100 % stacked values in column charts. |
    || **Use cumulative values** | Displays cumulative values in line charts. |
    || **Hide n/a data** | Hides data tagged as N/A from the chart. |
    || **Include only completed events** | Includes only completed events in the aggregation process. This is useful when you want for example to exclude partial events in indicator calculations. |
    || **Hide empty categories** | Hides the category items with no data from the chart.<br>     <br>**None**: doesn't hide any of the empty categories<br>     <br>**Before first**: hides missing values only before the first value<br>     <br>**After last**: hides missing values only after the last value<br>     <br>**Before first and after last**: hides missing values only before the first value and after the last value<br>     <br>**All**: hides all missing values<br>     <br>This is useful for example when you create column and bar charts. |
    || **Trend line** | Displays the trend line which visualizes how your data evolves over time. For example if performance is improving or deteriorating. Useful when periods are selected as category. |
    || **Target line value/title** | Displays a horizontal line and title (optional) at the given domain value. Useful for example when you want to compare your performance to the current target. |
    || **Base line value/title** | Displays a horizontal line and title (optional) at the given domain value. Useful for example when you want to visualize how your performance has evolved since the beginning of a process. |
    || **Sort order** | Allows you to sort the values on your chart from either low to high or high to low. |
    || **Output type** | Defines the output type. The output types are **Event**, **Enrollment** and**Tracked entity instance**. |
    || **Program status** | Filters data based on the program status: **All**, **Active**, **Completed** or **Cancelled**. |
    || **Event status** | Filters data based on the event status: **All**, **Active**, **Completed**, **Scheduled**, **Overdue** or **Skipped**. |
    | **Axes** | **Range axis min/max** | Defines the maximum and minimum value which will be visible on the range axis. |
    || **Range axis tick steps** | Defines the number of ticks which will be visible on the range axis. |
    || **Range axis decimals** | Defines the number of decimals which will be used for range axis values. |
    || **Range axis title** | Type a title here to display a label next to the range axis (also referred to as the Y axis). Useful when you want to give context information to the chart, for example about the unit of measure. |
    || **Domain axis title** | Type a title here to display a label below the domain axis (also referred to as the X axis). Useful when you want to give context information to the chart, for example about the period type. |
    | **General** | **Hide chart legend** | Hides the legend and leaves more room for the chart itself. |
    || **Hide chart title** | Hides the title (default or custom) of your chart. |
    || **Chart title** | Type a title here to display a custom title above the chart. If you don't enter a title, the default title is displayed. |
    || **Hide chart subtitle** | Hides the subtitle of your chart. |
    || **Chart subtitle** | Type a subtitle here to display a custom subtitle above the chart but below the title. If you don't enter a subtitle, no subtitle is displayed in the chart. |

3.  Clique em ** Actualizar **.

## Baixe um gráfico como imagem ou PDF { #download-a-chart-as-an-image-or-a-pdf } 

After you have created a chart you can download it to your local
computer as an image or PDF file.

1.  Clique em ** Download **.

2.  Em ** Gráficos **, clique em ** PNG (.png) ** ou ** PDF (.pdf) **.

    The file is automatically downloaded to your computer. Now you can
    for example embed the image file into a text document as part of a
    report.

## Baixar fonte de dados do gráfico { #download-chart-data-source } 

You can download the data source behind a chart in HTML, JSON, XML,
Microsoft Excel or CSV formats. The data document uses identifiers of
the dimension items and opens in a new browser window to display the URL
of the request to the Web API in the address bar. This is useful for
developers of apps and other client modules based on the DHIS2 Web API
or for those who require a plan data source, for instance for import
into statistical packages.

Para baixar formatos de fonte de dados simples:

1.  Clique em ** Download **.

2.  Em ** Fonte de dados simples **, clique no formato que deseja baixar.



    Table: Available formats

    | Format | Description |
    |---|---|
    | HTML | Creates HTML table based on selected meta data |
    | JSON | Downloads data values in JSON format based on selected meta data |
    | XML | Downloads data values in XML format based on selected meta data |
    | Microsoft Excel | Downloads data values in Microsoft Excel format based on selected meta data |
    | CSV | Downloads data values in CSV format based on selected meta data |

## Gerenciar favoritos { #manage-favorites } 

Saving your charts or pivot tables as favorites makes it easy to find
them later. You can also choose to share them with other users as an
interpretation or display them on the dashboard.

You view the details and interpretations of your favorites in the
**Pivot Table**, **Data Visualizer**, **Event Visualizer**, **Event
Reports** apps. Use the **Favorites** menu to manage your favorites.

### Abra um favorito { #open-a-favorite } 

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Abrir **.

2.  Enter the name of a favorite in the search field, or click **Prev**
    and **Next** to display favorites.

3.  Clique no nome do favorito que deseja abrir.

### Salvar um favorito { #save-a-favorite } 

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Salvar como **.

2.  Insira um ** Nome ** e uma ** Descrição ** para seu favorito. O campo de descrição oferece suporte a um formato de rich text, consulte a seção de interpretações para obter mais detalhes.

3.  Clique em **Salvar**.

### Renomear um favorito { #rename-a-favorite } 

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Renomear **.

2.  Digite o novo nome do seu favorito.

3.  Clique em ** Actualizar **.

### Escreva uma interpretação para um favorito { #write-an-interpretation-for-a-favorite } 

An interpretation is a link to a resource with a description of the data
at a given period. This information is visible in the **Dashboard** app.
To create an interpretation, you first need to create a favorite. If
you've shared your favorite with other people, the interpretation you
write is visible to those people.

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Interpretação de gravação **.

2.  In the text field, type a comment, question or interpretation. You
    can also mention other users with '@username'. Start by typing '@'
    plus the first letters of the username or real name and a mentioning
    bar will display the available users. Mentioned users will receive
    an internal DHIS2 message with the interpretation or comment. You
    can see the interpretation in the **Dashboard** app.

    It is possible to format the text with **bold**, *italic* by using the
    Markdown style markers \* and \_ for **bold** and *italic* respectively.
    Keyboard shortcuts are also available: Ctrl/Cmd + B and Ctrl/Cmd + I. A
    limited set of smilies is supported and can be used by typing one of the
    following character combinations: :) :-) :( :-( :+1 :-1. URLs are
    automatically detected and converted into a clickable link.

3.  Search for a user group that you want to share your favorite with,
    then click the **+** icon.

4.  Altere as configurações de compartilhamento para os grupos de usuários que deseja modificar.

      - **Pode editar e visualizar**: todos podem visualizar e editar o objeto.

      - **Pode visualizar apenas**: Todos podem visualizar o objeto.

      - **None**: The public won't have access to the object. This
        setting is only applicable to **Public access**.

5.  Clique em ** Compartilhar **.

### Inscreva-se em um favorito { #subscribe-to-a-favorite } 

When you are subscribed to a favorite, you receive internal messages
whenever another user likes/creates/updates an interpretation or
creates/update an interpretation comment of this favorite.

1.  Abra um favorito.

2.  Clique em ** \> \> \> ** no canto superior direito da área de trabalho.

3.  Clique no ícone de sino superior direito para se inscrever neste favorito.

### Crie um link para um favorito { #create-a-link-to-a-favorite } 

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Obter link **.

2.  Selecione um dos seguintes:

      - **Open in this app**: You get a URL for the favorite which you
        can share with other users by email or chat.

      - **Open in web api**: You get a URL of the API resource. By
        default this is an HTML resource, but you can change the file
        extension to ".json" or ".csv".

### Excluir um favorito { #delete-a-favorite } 

1.  Clique em ** Favoritos ** \> ** Excluir **.

2.  Clique **OK**.

### Veja as interpretações com base em períodos relativos { #view-interpretations-based-on-relative-periods } 

Para ver as interpretações de períodos relativos, como um ano atrás:

1.  Abra um favorito com interpretações.

2.  Clique em ** \> \> \> ** no canto superior direito da área de trabalho.

3.  Click an interpretation. Your chart displays the data and the date
    based on when the interpretation was created.To view other
    interpretations, click them.

## Visualize um gráfico como uma tabela dinâmica { #visualize-a-chart-as-a-pivot-table } 

Depois de criar um gráfico, você pode abri-lo como uma tabela dinâmica:

Clique em ** Gráfico ** \> ** Abrir este gráfico como tabela **.




# Funcionalidade de relatórios no aplicativo de relatórios { #using_the_reports_app } 

O aplicativo de relatórios permite relatórios prontos, relatórios padrão, relatórios de conjuntos de dados, recursos e relatórios de distribuição de unidades organizacionais.

## Usando relatórios padrão { #standard_reports_in_the_beta_reports_app } 

You access the available reports by navigating to Apps-\>Reports. In the
report menu in the left bar, click Standard Report. A list of all
pre-defined reports will appear in the main window.


![](resources/images/dhis2UserManual/react_reports_app_standard_reports.png)

You run/view a report by clicking on the triple-dot icon of the report and then
selecting "Create" from the contextual menu. If there are any
pre-defined parameters, you will see a report parameter window where you
must fill in the values needed for orgunit and/or reporting month,
depending on what has been defined in the underlying report table(s).
Click on "Generate Report" when you are ready. The report will either appear
directly in your browser or be available as a PDF file for download,
depending on your browser settings for handling PDF files. You can save
the file and keep it locally on your computer for later use.

## Usando relatórios de conjunto de dados { #dataset_reports_in_the_beta_reports_app } 

Dataset reports are printer friendly views of the data entry screen
filled with either raw or aggregated data.

You can access data set reports from Apps-\>Reports.

A Criteria window will appear where you fill in the details for your
report:

** Conjunto de dados: ** o conjunto de dados que você deseja exibir.

**Report period:** The actual period you want data for. This can be
aggregated as well as raw periods. This means that you can ask for a
quarterly or annual report even though the data set is collected
monthly. A data set's period type (collection frequency) is defined in
data set maintenance. First select the period type (Monthly, Quarterly,
Yearly etc.) in the drop down next to Prev and Next buttons, and then
select one of the available periods from the dropdown list below. Use
Prev and Next to jump one year back or forward.

**Use data for selected unit only:** Use this option if you want a
report for an orgunit that has children, but only want the data
collected directly for this unit and not the data collected by its
children. If you want a typical aggregated report for an orgunit you do
not want to tick this option.

**Report Organisation unit:** Here you select the orgunit you want
the report for. This can be at any level in the hierarchy as the data
will be aggregated up to this level automatically (if you do not tick
the option above).

When you are done filling in the report criteria you click on
"Generate". The report will appear as HTML in a printer-friendly format.
Use the print and save as functions in the browser to print or save (as
HTML) the report.You can also export the data set report in Excel and
PDF formats.

## Usando o resumo da taxa de relatório { #reporting_rate_summary_in_the_beta_reports_app } 

Access the reporting rate summary from the Apps-\>Reports menu.
Reporting rate summaries will show how many datasets (forms) that have
been submitted by organisation unit and period.

The reporting rate is calculation is based on complete data set registrations.
A complete data set registration refers to a user marking a data entry form as
complete, typically by clicking the complete button in the data entry screen,
hereby indicating to the system that she considers the form to be
complete. This is i.e. a subjective approach to calculating
completeness.

O resumo da taxa de relatório, para cada linha, mostrará uma série de medidas:

  - Actual reports: Indicates the number of data entry complete
    registrations for the relevant data set.

  - Expected reports: Indicates how many data entry complete
    registrations are expected. This number is based on the number of
    organisation units the relevant data set has been assigned to
    (enabled for data entry).

  - Reporting rate: The percentage of reports registered as complete based on
    the number expected.

  - Reports on time: Same as actual reports, only reports registered as
    complete within the maximum number of days after the end of the
    reporting period. This number of days after reporting period can be
    defined per data set in the data set management.

  - Reporting rate on time: Same as percentage, only reports registered as
    complete on time used as numerator.

Para executar o relatório, você pode seguir estas etapas:

  - Selecione um orgunit da árvore.

  - Selecione um conjunto de dados.

  - Select a period type and a period from the list of available periods
    for that period type.

  - The report will then be rendered. Change any of the parameters above
    and click "Get report" again see the corresponding results.


![](resources/images/dhis2UserManual/react_reports_app_reporting_rate_summary.png)

## Usando recursos { #resources_in_the_beta_reports_app } 

The resource tool allows you to upload both files from your local
computer to the DHIS server and to add links to other resources on the
Internet through URLs. If cloud storage is configured for your system,
resources will be saved there.

Para criar um novo recurso:

1.  Open the **Reports** app and click **Resource**.

2.  Clique em ** Adicionar novo **.

3.  Insira um **nome**.

4.  Selecione um ** Tipo **: ** Carregar arquivo ** ou ** URL externo **.

5.  Clique em **Salvar**.

## Usando relatórios de distribuição de unidade organizacional { #orgunit_distribution_reports_in_the_beta_reports_app } 

You can access the Orgunit Distribution reports from the left side menu
in the Apps-\>Reports.

Orgunit distribution reports are reports that show how the orgunits are
distributed on various properties like type and ownership, and by
geographical areas.

O resultado pode ser apresentado em um relatório baseado em tabela ou em um gráfico.

** Executando um relatório: **

To run a report first select an orgunit in the upper left side orgunit
tree. The report will be based on orgunits located under the selected
orgunit. The select the orgunit group set that you want to use,
typically these are Type, Ownership, Rural/Urban, but can be any
user-defined orgunit group set. The you can click on either Get Report
to get the table-based presentation or Get chart to get the same result
in a chart. You can also download the table-based report as Excel or
CSV.


![](resources/images/dhis2UserManual/react_reports_app_org_unit_dist.png)



# Mensagens { #messages } 

## Sobre mensagens e comentários { #about-messages-and-feedback-messages } 

![](resources/images/messaging/view_inbox.png)

Within DHIS2 you can send messages and feedback messages to users, user
groups and organisation units. When you send a feedback message, it is
routed to a particular user group called the feedback recipient group.
If you are a member of this user group, you have access to feedback
handling tools. You can, for example, set the status of an incoming
feedback to "Pending" while you are waiting for information.

In addition to the user-to-user and feedback messages, depending on your
configuration the system will also send you system-generated messages.
These messages could be triggered by different events, including system
or background job failures and validation analysis results. Feedback
handling tools are also available for validation results and the
priority will be set to the importance of the validation rule violated.

To visit the app click **message icon in header bar** or find the
**Messaging** app in the app search box.

> **Note**
>
> Messages and feedback messages are not sent to users' e-mail
> addresses, the messages only appear within DHIS2.
>
> With 2.30 we introduced a new messaging app which offers a richer
> messaging experience. Specifically:
>
>   - Switch between list view and compact view by clicking the icon in
>     the top right corner.
>     - The list view is simplistic and gives a good
>     overview of all messages and is especially suited for feedback and
>     validation messages.
>     - The compact view is a modern way of view
>     messages where the user has more information in one view, hence
>     viewing and replying several messages is easier.
>
>     The first screenshot in this section displays list view, while the
>     screenshot in section **Read a message** displays the compact
>     view.
>
>   - A new search field is added which enables the user to search for
>     messages. The search filters messages on different message
>     attributes; subject, text and senders. This implies that you are
>     able to narrow down the message conversation list by entering a
>     search.
>
>   - A auto refresh feature is added so that the app fetches new
>     messages at a set interval, every 5 minutes. This feature is
>     disabled by default.
>
>   - For every message conversation you are able to add participants to
>     the conversation. This is very useful if you want input on that
>     particular conversation or if someone should also see the
>     information. It is not possible to delete participants from a
>     conversation.

## Crie uma mensagem { #create-a-message } 

![](resources/images/messaging/create_private_message.png)

1.  Clique em ** Compose **.

2.  Define who you want to receive the message. You can send a message
    to organisation units, users and user groups.

      - In the **To** field you can search for organisation units, users
        and user groups and select the wished recipients.

3.  Digite um assunto e uma mensagem.

4.  Clique em ** Enviar **.

## Leia uma mensagem { #read-a-message } 

![](resources/images/messaging/read_message.png)

1.  Selecione o tipo de mensagem apropriado à esquerda.

2.  Clique em uma mensagem.

    If the message is part of a conversation, you will see all messages in
    this conversation.

## Crie uma mensagem de feedback { #create-a-feedback-message } 

1.  Follow the steps as for creating a message, only selecting
    **Feedback message** instead of entering recipients.

2.  The message will be created as a feedback message and will appear in
    all of the specified users' **Ticket** folder.

## Anexos { #attachments } 

With 2.31 we introduced attachments to messages. When creating or
replying to a message conversation you have the possibility to add
attachments. Currently there are no limitations to type or size of the
file.

## Gerenciar mensagens de validação e feedback { #manage-validation-and-feedback-messages } 

> **Note**
>
> You will only see feedback messages and have access to the extended
> handling tools if you are a member of the user group that is set up to
> handle feedback messages.
>
> With the new app you manage extended tools for tickets and validation
> messages through the icon menu which appears when viewing a message or
> checking of messages in the conversation list.

### Todas as mensagens selecionadas { #all-messages-selected } 
![All Messages Selected](resources/images/messaging/view_validation_select_all.png)
### Todas as mensagens selecionadas e o seletor de escolha estendida selecionado { #all-messages-selected-and-extended-choice-picker-selected } 
![All messages selected and extended choice picker selected](resources/images/messaging/view_validation_select_all_icon_menu.png)


You will receive feedback messages to your **Ticket** folder and
validation messages to your **Validation** folder. For feedback and
validation messages you have the following options in addition to the
messages options:

 <table style="width:100%;">
 <caption> Ferramentas de tratamento de feedback </caption>
 <colgroup>
 <col width="23%" />
 <col width="76%" />
 </colgroup>
 <thead>
 <tr class="header">
 Função <th> </th>
 <th> Descrição </th>
 </tr>
 </thead>
 <tbody>
 <tr class="odd">
 <td> <p> <strong> Prioridade </strong> </p> </td>
 <td> <p> Você pode marcar uma mensagem de feedback / validação com diferentes prioridades: <strong> Nenhum </strong>, <strong> Baixo </strong>, <strong> Médio</strong><strong> Alto </strong></p>
 <p> Definir a prioridade torna mais fácil acompanhar qual mensagem de feedback você precisa resolver primeiro e quais mensagens de feedback você pode esperar. </p> </td>
 </tr>
 <tr class="even">
 <td> <p> <strong> Status </strong> </p> </td>
 <td> <p> Todas as mensagens de feedback / validação obtêm o status <strong> Abra </strong> quando criado. </p>
 <p> Para rastrear as mensagens de feedback existentes, você pode alterar o status para <strong> Pendente </strong>, <strong> Inválido </strong> ou <strong> Resolvido </strong>. </p>
 <p> Você pode filtrar mensagens de feedback / validação com base em seu status com os dois menus suspensos na barra de cabeçalho interna. </p> </td>
 </tr>
 <tr class="odd">
 <td> <p> <strong> Atribuído a </strong> </p> </td>
 <td> <p> Você pode atribuir uma mensagem de feedback a qualquer membro do grupo de usuários configurado para lidar com mensagens de feedback. </p>
 <p> Você pode atribuir uma mensagem de validação a qualquer usuário no sistema. </p>
 <p> <strong> - </strong> significa que você não atribuiu um usuário à mensagem de feedback. </p> </td>
 </tr>
 <tr class="even">
 <td> <p> <strong> Resposta interna </strong> </p> </td>
 <td> <p> Quando você trabalha em uma equipe de tratamento de feedback, pode querer discutir o feedback antes de enviar uma resposta ao remetente. Você pode manter essa discussão na mesma conversa da mensagem que o feedback em si. </p>
 <p> Para enviar uma resposta dentro do grupo de usuários de tratamento de feedback, clique em <strong> RESPOSTA INTERNA </strong>. </p> </td>
 </tr>
 </tbody>
 </table>

## Configure a função de mensagem de feedback { #configure-feedback-message-function } 

Para configurar a função de mensagem de feedback, você deve:

1.  Create a user group (for example "Feedback message recipients") that
    contains all the users who should receive feedback messages.

2.  Open the **System Settings** app and click **General** \> **Feedback
    recipients** and select the user group you created in the previous
    step.



# Definir as preferências da conta do usuário { #user_account_preferences }

In **Edit user profile**, you can add personal information to your profile
such as your email address, mobile phone number, date of birth, profile
picture and more. When you send messages, the person receiving the message can see these
profile details. You can also provide account names for various direct
messaging services, which will be used by the system.

In **Edit user settings**, you can change the display language of DHIS2 and
the language of the database. The database language is the translated
content of the metadata, such as data elements and indicators. You can
also choose a display style, and enable or disable SMS and email
notifications. If you wish to, you can choose to display a short name,
such as "Joe" in the analysis modules, rather than your full name.

In **Edit account settings**, you can reset your password and setup 2-Factor
authentication. Setting up 2-Factor authentication will require you to
download the Google Authenticator app on you mobile device.

In the **View full profile** section, you find a summary of your profile details.
This section includes a few fields that you cannot edit yourself,
such as user roles and user organisation units.

In **Manage personal access tokens** you can view the existing personal access
tokens, revoke existing tokens and generate new ones. Personal access tokens are
an alternative to using passwords for authentication and useful for providing
(restricted) access to scripts and external applications. Note that the values of
newly generated personal access tokens are only visible right after generating.

Na seção **Sobre DHIS2**, encontrará uma lista de detalhes sobre a instância DHIS2.

