---
revision_date: '2020-04-26'
template: single.html
---

# What is DHIS2? { #what_is_dhis2 } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:what_is_dhis2-->

Después de leer este capítulo, podrá comprender:

  - What is DHIS2 and what purpose it serves with respect to health
    information systems (HIS)?

  - What are the major technological considerations when it comes to
    deploying DHIS2, and what are the options are for extending DHIS2
    with new modules?

  - ¿Cuál es la diferencia entre datos agregados y basados ​​en pacientes?

  - What are some of the benefits and challenges with using Free and
    Open Source Software (FOSS) for HIS?

## DHIS2 Background { #mod1_1 } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:mod1_1-->

DHIS2 is a tool for collection, validation, analysis, and presentation
of aggregate and patient-based statistical data, tailored (but not
limited) to integrated health information management activities. It is a
generic tool rather than a pre-configured database application, with an
open meta-data model and a flexible user interface that allows the user
to design the contents of a specific information system without the need
for programming. DHIS2 is a modular web-based software package built
with free and open source Java frameworks.

DHIS2 is open source software released under the BSD license and can be
obtained at no cost. It runs on any platform with a Java Runtime
Environment (JRE 7 or higher) installed.

DHIS2 is developed by the Health Information Systems Programme (HISP) as
an open and globally distributed process with developers currently in
India, Vietnam, Tanzania, Ireland, and Norway. The development is
coordinated by the University of Oslo with support from NORAD and other
donors.

The DHIS2 software is used in more than 40 countries in Africa, Asia,
and Latin America, and countries that have adopted DHIS2 as their
nation-wide HIS software include Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Rwanda, Ghana,
Liberia, and Bangladesh. A rapidly increasing number of countries and
organisations are starting up new deployments.

The documentation provided herewith, will attempt to provide a
comprehensive overview of the application. Given the abstract nature of
the application, this manual will not serve as a complete step-by-step
guide of how to use the application in each and every circumstance, but
rather will seek to provide illustrations and examples of how DHIS2 can
be implemented in a variety of situations through generalized examples.

Before implementing DHIS2 in a new setting, we highly recommend reading
the DHIS2 Implementation Guide (a separate manual from this one), also
available at the main DHIS2 [website](http://dhis2.org/documentation/).

## Key features and purpose of DHIS2 { #key-features-and-purpose-of-dhis2 } 

Las características principales y el propósito de DHIS2 se pueden resumir de la siguiente manera:

  - Provide a comprehensive data management solution based on data
    warehousing principles and a modular structure which can easily be
    customised to the different requirements of a management information
    system, supporting analysis at different levels of the
    organisational hierarchy.

  - Customisation and local adaptation through the user interface. No
    programming required to start using DHIS2 in a new setting (country,
    region, district etc.).

  - Provide data entry tools which can either be in the form of standard
    lists or tables, or can be customised to replicate paper forms.

  - Provide different kinds of tools for data validation and improvement
    of data quality.

  - Provide easy to use - one-click reports with charts and tables for
    selected indicators or summary reports using the design of the data
    collection tools. Allow for integration with popular external report
    design tools (e.g. JasperReports) to add more custom or advanced
    reports.

  - Flexible and dynamic (on-the-fly) data analysis in the analytics
    modules (i.e. GIS, PivotTables,Data Visualizer, Event reports, etc).

  - A user-specific dashboard for quick access to the relevant
    monitoring and evaluation tools including indicator charts and links
    to favourite reports, maps and other key resources in the system.

  - Easy to use user-interfaces for metadata management e.g. for
    adding/editing datasets or health facilities. No programming needed
    to set up the system in a new setting.

  - Funcionalidad para diseñar y modificar fórmulas de indicadores calculados.

  - User management module for passwords, security, and fine-grained
    access control (user roles).

  - Messages can be sent to system users for feedback and notifications.
    Messages can also be delivered to email and SMS.

  - Users can share and discuss their data in charts and reports using
    Interpretations, enabling an active information-driven user
    community.

  - Functionalities of export-import of data and metadata, supporting
    synchronisation of offline installations as well as interoperability
    with other applications.

  - Using the DHIS2 Web-API , allow for integration with external
    software and extension of the core platform through the use of
    custom apps.

  - Further modules can be developed and integrated as per user needs,
    either as part of the DHIS2 portal user interface or a more
    loosely-coupled external application interacting through the DHIS2
    Web-API.

In summary, DHIS2 provides a comprehensive HIS solution for the
reporting and analysis needs of health information users at any
level.

## Use of DHIS2 in HIS: data collection, processing, interpretation, and analysis. { #use-of-dhis2-in-his-data-collection-processing-interpretation-and-analysis } 

The wider context of HIS can be comprehensively described through the
information cycle presented in Figure 1.1 below. The information cycle
pictorially depicts the different components, stages and processes
through which the data is collected, checked for quality, processed,
analysed and used.


![The health information
cycle](resources/images/dhis2UserManual/dhis2_information_cycle.png)

DHIS2 soporta las diferentes facetas del ciclo de información, incluyendo:

  - Recopilación de datos.

  - Ejecución de controles de calidad.

  - Acceso a datos en múltiples niveles.

  - Informes.

  - Realización de gráficos, mapas y otras formas de análisis.

  - Enabling comparison across time (for example, previous months) and
    space (for example, across facilities and districts).

  - See trends (displaying data in time series to see their min and max
    levels).

As a first step, DHIS2 serves as a data collection, recording and
compilation tool, and all data (be it in numbers or text form) can be
entered into it. Data entry can be done in lists of data elements or in
customised user defined forms which can be developed to mimic paper
based forms in order to ease the process of data entry.

As a next step, DHIS2 can be used to increase data quality. First, at
the point of data entry, a check can be made to see if data falls within
acceptable range levels of minimum and maximum values for any particular
data element. Such checking, for example, can help to identify typing
errors at the time of data entry. Further, user can define various
validation rules, and DHIS2 can run the data through the validation
rules to identify violations. These types of checks help to ensure that
data entered into the system is of good quality from the start, and can
be improved by the people who are most familiar with it.

When data has been entered and verified, DHIS2 can help to make
different kinds of reports. The first kind are the routine reports that
can be predefined, so that all those reports that need to be routine
generated can be done on a click of a button. Further, DHIS2 can help in
the generation of analytical reports through comparisons of for example
indicators across facilities or over time. Graphs, maps, reports and
health profiles are among the outputs that DHIS2 can produce, and these
should routinely be produced, analysed, and acted upon by health
managers.

## Technical background { #technical-background } 

### DHIS2 as a platform { #dhis2-as-a-platform } 

DHIS2 can be perceived as a platform on several levels. First, the
application database is designed ground-up with flexibility in mind.
Data structures such as data elements, organisation units, forms and
user roles can be defined completely freely through the application user
interface. This makes it possible for the system to be adapted to a
multitude of locale contexts and use-cases. We have seen that DHIS2
supports most major requirements for routine data capture and analysis
emerging in country implementations. It also makes it possible for DHIS2
to serve as management system for domains such as logistics, labs and
finance.

Second, due to the modular design of DHIS2 it can be extended with
additional software modules or through custom apps. These software
modules/apps can live side by side with the core modules of DHIS2 and
can be integrated into the DHIS2 portal and menu system. This is a
powerful feature as it makes it possible to extend the system with extra
functionality when needed, typically for country specific requirements
as earlier pointed out.

The downside of the software module extensibility is that it puts
several constraints on the development process. The developers creating
the extra functionality are limited to the DHIS2 technology in terms of
programming language and software frameworks, in addition to the
constraints put on the design of modules by the DHIS2 portal solution.
Also, these modules must be included in the DHIS2 software when the
software is built and deployed on the web server, not dynamically during
run-time.

In order to overcome these limitations and achieve a looser coupling
between the DHIS2 service layer and additional software artefacts, a
REST-based API has been developed as part of DHIS2. This Web API
complies with the rules of the REST architectural style. This implies
that:

  - The Web API provides a navigable and machine-readable interface to
    the complete DHIS2 data model. For instance, one can access the full
    list of data elements, then navigate using the provided URL to a
    particular data element of interest, then navigate using the
    provided URL to the list of data sets which the data element is a
    member of.

  - (Meta) Data is accessed through a uniform interface (URLs) using
    plain HTTP requests. There are no fancy transport formats or
    protocols involved - just the well-tested, well-understood HTTP
    protocol which is the main building block of the Web today. This
    implies that third-party developers can develop software using the
    DHIS2 data model and data without knowing the DHIS2 2specific
    technology or complying with the DHIS2 design constraints.

  - All data including meta-data, reports, maps and charts, known as
    resources in REST terminology, can be retrieved in most of the
    popular representation formats of the Web of today, such as XML,
    JSON, PDF and PNG. These formats are widely supported in
    applications and programming languages and gives third-party
    developers a wide range of implementation options.

### Understanding platform independence { #understanding-platform-independence } 

All computers have an Operating System (OS) to manage it and the
programs running it. The operating system serves as the middle layer
between the software application, such as DHIS2, and the hardware, such
as the CPU and RAM. DHIS2 runs on the Java Virtual Machine, and can
therefore run on any operating system which supports Java. Platform
independence implies that the software application can run on ANY OS -
Windows, Linux, Macintosh etc. DHIS2 is platform independent and thus
can be used in many different contexts depending on the exact
requirements of the operating system to be used.

Additionally, DHIS2 supports three major database management systems
systems (DBMS). DHIS2 uses the Hibernate database abstraction framework
and is compatible with the following database systems: PostgreSQL, MySQL
and H2. PostgreSQL and MySQL are high-quality production ready
databases, while H2 is a useful in-memory database for small-scale
applications or development activities.

Lastly, and perhaps most importantly, since DHIS2 is a browser-based
application, the only real requirement to interact with the system is
with a web browser. DHIS2 supports most web browsers, although currently
either Google Chrome, Mozilla Firefox or Opera are recommended.

### Deployment strategies - online vs offline { #deployment-strategies-online-vs-offline } 

DHIS2 is a network enabled application and can be accessed over the
Internet, a local intranet as well as a locally installed system. The
deployment alternatives for DHIS2 are in this chapter defined as i)
offline deployment ii) online deployment and iii) hybrid deployment. The
meaning and differences will be discussed in the following sections.

#### Offline Deployment { #offline-deployment } 

An off-line deployment implies that multiple standalone off-line
instances are installed for end users, typically at the district level.
The system is maintained primarily by the end users/district health
officers who enters data and generate reports from the system running on
their local server. The system will also typically be maintained by a
national super-user team who pay regular visits to the district
deployments. Data is moved upwards in the hierarchy by the end users
producing data exchange files which are sent electronically by email or
physically by mail or personal travel. (Note that the brief Internet
connectivity required for sending emails does not qualify for being
defined as on-line). This style of deployment has the obvious benefit
that it works when appropriate Internet connectivity is not available.
On the other side there are significant challenges with this style which
are described in the following section.

  - **Hardware:** Running stand-alone systems requires advanced hardware
    in terms of servers and reliable power supply to be installed,
    usually at district level, all over the country. This requires
    appropriate funding for procurement and plan for long-term
    maintenance.

  - **Software platform:** Local installs implies a significant need for
    maintenance. From experience, the biggest challenge is viruses and
    other malware which tend to infect local installations in the
    long-run. The main reason is that end users utilize memory sticks
    for transporting data exchange files and documents between private
    computers, other workstations and the system running the
    application. Keeping anti-virus software and operating system
    patches up to date in an off-line environment are challenging and
    bad practices in terms of security are often adopted by end users.
    The preferred way to overcome this issue is to run a dedicated
    server for the application where no memory sticks are allowed and
    use an Linux based operating system which is not as prone for virus
    infections as MS Windows.

  - **Software application:** Being able to distribute new functionality
    and bug-fixes to the health information software to users are
    essential for maintenance and improvement of the system. Relying on
    the end users to perform software upgrades requires extensive
    training and a high level of competence on their side as upgrading
    software applications might a technically challenging task. Relying
    on a national super-user team to maintain the software implies a lot
    of travelling.

  - **Database maintenance:**A prerequisite for an efficient system is
    that all users enter data with a standardized meta-data set (data
    elements, forms etc). As with the previous point about software
    upgrades, distribution of changes to the meta-data set to numerous
    off-line installations requires end user competence if the updates
    are sent electronically or a well-organized super-user team. Failure
    to keep the meta-data set synchronized will lead to loss of ability
    to move data from the districts and/or an inconsistent national
    database since the data entered for instance at the district level
    will not be compatible with the data at the national level.

#### Online deployment { #online-deployment } 

An on-line deployment implies that a single instance of the application
is set up on a server connected to the Internet. All users (clients)
connect to the on-line central server over the Internet using a web
browser. This style of deployment is increasingly possible due to
increased availability in (mobile) Internet coverage globally, as well
as readily available and cheap cloud-computing resources. These
developments make it possible to access on-line servers in even the most
rural areas using mobile Internet modems (also referred to as
*dongles*).

This on-line deployment style has huge positive implications for the
implementation process and application maintenance compared to the
traditional off-line standalone style:

  - **Hardware:** Hardware requirements on the end-user side are limited
    to a reasonably modern computer/laptop and Internet connectivity
    through a fixed line or a mobile modem. There is no need for a
    specialized server for each user, any Internet enabled computer will
    be sufficient. A server will be required for on-line deployments,
    but since there is only one (or several) servers which need to be
    procured and maintained, this is significantly simpler (and cheaper)
    than maintaining many separate servers is disparate locations. Given
    that cloud-computing resources continue to steadily decrease in
    price while increasing in computational power, setting up a powerful
    server in the cloud is far cheaper than procuring hardware.

  - **Software platform:** The end users only need a web browser to
    connect to the on-line server. All popular operating systems today
    are shipped with a web browser and there is no special requirement
    on what type or version. This means that if severe problems such as
    virus infections or software corruption occur one can always resort
    to re-formatting and installing the computer operating system or
    obtain a new computer/laptop. The user can continue with data entry
    where it was left and no data will be lost.

  - **Software application:** The central server deployment style means
    that the application can be upgraded and maintained in a centralized
    fashion. When new versions of the applications are released with new
    features and bug-fixes it can be deployed to the single on-line
    server. All changes will then be reflected on the client side the
    next time end users connect over the Internet. This obviously has a
    huge positive impact for the process of improving the system as new
    features can be distributed to users immediately, all users will be
    accessing the same application version, and bugs and issues can be
    sorted out and deployed on-the-fly.

  - **Database maintenance:**Similar to the previous point, changes to
    the meta-data can be done on the on-line server in a centralized
    fashion and will automatically propagate to all clients next time
    they connect to the server. This effectively removes the vast issues
    related to maintaining an upgraded and standardized meta-data set
    related to the traditional off-line deployment style. It is
    extremely convenient for instance during the initial database
    development phase and during the annual database revision processes
    as end users will be accessing a consistent and standardized
    database even when changes occur frequently.

This approach might be problematic in cases where Internet connectivity
is volatile or missing in long periods of time. DHIS2 however has
certain features which requires Internet connectivity to be available
only part of the time for the system to work properly, such as offline
data entry. In general however, DHIS2 does require Internet connectivity
of some sort, but this is increasingly an easy problem to solve even in
remote locations.

#### Hybrid deployment { #hybrid-deployment } 

From the discussion so far one realizes that the on-line deployment
style is favourable over the off-line style but requires decent Internet
connectivity where it will be used. It is important to notice that the
mentioned styles can co-exist in a common deployment. It is perfectly
feasible to have on-line as well as off-line deployments within a single
country. The general rule would be that districts and facilities should
access the system on-line over the Internet where sufficient Internet
connectivity exist, and off-line systems should be deployed to districts
where this is not the case.

Defining decent Internet connectivity precisely is hard but as a rule of
thumb the download speed should be minimum 10 Kbyte/second for the
client and at least 1 Mbit/sec (dedicated) bandwidth for the server.

In this regard mobile Internet modems which can be connected to a
computer or laptop and access the mobile network is an extremely capable
and feasible solution. Mobile Internet coverage is increasing rapidly
all over the world, often provide excellent connectivity at low prices
and is a great alternative to local networks and poorly maintained fixed
Internet lines. Getting in contact with national mobile network
companies regarding post-paid subscriptions and potential large-order
benefits can be a worthwhile effort. The network coverage for each
network operator in the relevant country should be investigated when
deciding which deployment approach to opt for as it might differ and
cover different parts of the country.

#### Server hosting { #server-hosting } 

The on-line deployment approach raises the question of where and how to
host the server which will run the DHIS2 application. Typically there
are several options:

1.  Internal hosting within the Ministry of Health

2.  Hosting within a government data centre

3.  Hosting through an external hosting company

The main reason for choosing the first option is often political
motivation for having “physical ownership” of the database. This is
perceived as important by many in order to “own” and control the data.
There is also a wish to build local capacity for server administration
related to sustainability of the project. This is often a donor-driven
initiatives as it is perceived as a concrete and helpful mission.

Regarding the second option, some places a government data centre is
constructed with a view to promoting and improving the use and
accessibility of public data. Another reason is that a proliferation of
internal server environments is very resource demanding and it is more
effective to establish centralized infrastructure and capacity.

Regarding external hosting there is lately a move towards outsourcing
the operation and administration of computer resources to an external
provider, where those resources are accessed over the network, popularly
referred to as “cloud computing” or “software as a service”. Those
resources are typically accessed over the Internet using a web browser.

The primary goal for an on-line server deployment is provide long-term
stable and high-performance accessibility to the intended services. When
deciding which option to choose for server environment there are many
aspects to consider:

1.  Human capacity for server administration and operation. There must
    be human resources with general skills in server administration and
    in the specific technologies used for the application providing the
    services. Examples of such technologies are web servers and database
    management platforms.

2.  Reliable solutions for automated backups, including local off-server
    and remote backup.

3.  Stable connectivity and high network bandwidth for traffic to and
    from the server.

4.  Stable power supply including a backup solution.

5.  Secure environment for the physical server regarding issues such as
    access, theft and fire.

6.  Presence of a disaster recovery plan. This plan must contain a
    realistic strategy for making sure that the service will be only
    suffering short down-times in the events of hardware failures,
    network downtime and more.

7.  Feasible, powerful and robust hardware.

All of these aspects must be covered in order to create an appropriate
hosting environment. The hardware requirement is deliberately put last
since there is a clear tendency to give it too much attention.

Looking back at the three main hosting options, experience from
implementation missions in developing countries suggests that all of the
hosting aspects are rarely present in option one and two at a feasible
level. Reaching an acceptable level in all these aspects is challenging
in terms of both human resources and money, especially when compared to
the cost of option three. It has the benefit that is accommodates the
mentioned political aspects and building local capacity for server
administration, on the other hand can this be provided for in
alternative ways.

Option three - external hosting - has the benefit that it supports all
of the mentioned hosting aspects at a very affordable price. Several
hosting providers - of virtual servers or software as a service - offer
reliable services for running most kinds of applications. Example of
such providers are [Linode](http://www.linode.com) and [Amazon Web
Services](http://aws.amazon.com). Administration of such servers happens
over a network connection, which most often anyway is the case with
local server administration. The physical location of the server in this
case becomes irrelevant as that such providers offer services in most
parts of the world. This solution is increasingly becoming the standard
solution for hosting of application services. The aspect of building
local capacity for server administration is compatible with this option
since a local ICT team can be tasked with maintaining the externally
hosted server, but with not being burdened with worrying about power
supply and bandwidth constraints which usually exist outside of major
data centres.

An approach for combining the benefits of external hosting with the need
for local hosting and physical ownership is to use an external hosting
provider for the primary transactional system, while mirroring this
server to a locally hosted non-critical server which is used for
read-only purposes such as data analysis and accessed over the intranet.

## Difference between Aggregated and Patient data in a HIS { #difference-between-aggregated-and-patient-data-in-a-his } 

*Patient data* is data relating to a single patient, such as his/her
diagnosis, name, age, earlier medical history etc. This data is
typically based on a single patient-health care worker interaction. For
instance, when a patient visits a health care clinic, a variety of
details may be recorded, such as the patient's temperature, their
weight, and various blood tests. Should this patient be diagnosed as
having "Vitamin B 12 deficiency anaemia, unspecified" corresponding to
ICD-10 code D51.9, this particular interaction might eventually get
recorded as an instance of "Anaemia" in an aggregate based system.
Patient based data is important when you want to track longitudinally
the progress of a patient over time. For example, if we want to track
how a patient is adhering to and responding to the process of TB
treatment (typically taking place over 6-9 months), we would need
patient based data.

*Aggregated data* is the consolidation of data relating to multiple
patients, and therefore cannot be traced back to a specific patient.
They are merely counts, such as incidences of Malaria, TB, or other
diseases. Typically, the routine data that a health facility deals with
is this kind of aggregated statistics, and is used for the generation of
routine reports and indicators, and most importantly, strategic planning
within the health system. Aggregate data cannot provide the type of
detailed information which patient level data can, but is crucial for
planning and guidance of the performance of health systems.

In between the two you have case-based data, or anonymous "patient"
data. A lot of details can be collected about a specific health event
without necessarily having to identify the patient it involved.
Inpatient or outpatient visits, a new case of cholera, a maternal death
etc. are common use-cases where one would like to collect a lot more
detail that just adding to the total count of cases, or visits. This
data is often collected in line-listing type of forms, or in more
detailed audit forms. It is different from aggregate data in the sense
that it contains many details about a specific event, whereas the
aggregate data would count how many events of a certain type, e.g. how
many outpatient visits with principal diagnosis "Malaria", or how many
maternal deaths where the deceased did not attend ANC, or how many
cholera outbreaks for children under 5 years. In DHIS2 this data is
collected through programs of the type single event without
registration.

Patient data is highly confidential and therefore must be protected so
that no one other than doctors can get it. When in paper, it must be
properly stored in a secure place. For computers, patient data needs
secure systems with passwords, restrained access and audit logs.

Security concerns for aggregated data are not as crucial as for patient
data, as it is usually impossible to identify a particular person to a
aggregate statistic . However, data can still be misused and
misinterpreted by others, and should not be distributed without adequate
data dissemination policies in place.

## Free and Open Source Software (FOSS): benefits and challenges { #free-and-open-source-software-foss-benefits-and-challenges } 

Software carries the instructions that tell a computer how to operate.
The human authored and human readable form of those instructions is
called source code. Before the computer can actually execute the
instructions, the source code must be translated into a machine readable
(binary) format, called the object code. All distributed software
includes the object code, but FOSS makes the source code available as
well.

Proprietary software owners license their copyrighted object code to a
user, which allows the user to run the program. FOSS programs, on the
other hand, license both the object and the source code, permitting the
user to run, modify and possibly redistribute the programs. With access
to the source code, the users have the freedom to run the program for
any purpose, redistribute, probe, adapt, learn from, customise the
software to suit their needs, and release improvements to the public for
the good of the community. Hence, some FOSS is also known as free
software, where “free” refers, first and foremost, to the above freedoms
rather than in the monetary sense of the word.

Within the public health sector, FOSS can potentially have a range of
benefits, including:

  - Lower costs as it does not involve paying for prohibitive license
    costs.

  - Given the information needs for the health sector are constantly
    changing and evolving, there is a need for the user to have the
    freedom to make the changes as per the user requirements. This is
    often limited in proprietary systems.

  - Access to source code to enable integration and interoperability. In
    the health sector interoperability between different software
    applications is becoming increasingly important, meaning enabling
    two or more systems to communicate metadata and data. This work is a
    lot easier, and sometimes dependent on the source code being
    available to the developers that create the integration. This
    availability is often not possible in the case of proprietary
    software. And when it is, it comes at a high cost and contractual
    obligations.

  - FOSS applications like DHIS2 typically are supported by a global
    network of developers, and thus have access to cutting edge research
    and development knowledge.


# Using the Data Entry app { #data_entry_app } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:data_entry_app-->

## About the Data Entry app { #about_data_entry_app } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:about_data_entry_app-->

The **Data Entry** app is where you manually enter aggregated data in
DHIS2. You register data for an organisation unit, a period, and a set
of data elements (data set) at a time. A data set often corresponds to a
paper-based data collection tool. You configure the data sets in the
**Maintenance** app.

> **Note**
> 
> If a data set has both a section form and a custom form, the system
> displays the custom form during data entry. Users who enter data can't
> select which form they want to use. In web-based data entry the order
> of display preference is:
> 
> 1.  Custom form (if it exists)
> 
> 2.  Section form (if it exists)
> 
> 3.  Default form
> 
> Mobile devices do not support custom forms. In mobile-based data entry
> the order of display preference is:
> 
> 1.  Section form (if it exists)
> 
> 2.  Default form

When you close an organisation unit, you can't register or edit data to
this organisation unit in the **Data Entry** app.

## Enter data in a data entry form { #enter_data_in_data_entry_form } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:enter_data_in_data_entry_form-->

![](resources/images/data_entry/data_entry_overview.png)

1.  Abra la aplicación **Entrada de datos**.

2.  In the organisation unit tree to the left, select an organisation
    unit.

3.  Seleccione un **Set de Datos**.

4.  Seleccione un **Periodo**.

    The available periods are controlled by the period type of the data
    set (reporting frequency). You can jump a year back or forward by
    clicking **Prev year** or **Next year**.

    > **Note**
    > 
    > Depending on how you've configured the data entry form, you might
    > have to enter additional information before you can open the date
    > entry form. This can for example be a project derived from a
    > category combination.

5.  Introducir datos en un formulario de entrada de datos.

      - Un campo verde significa que el sistema ha guardado el valor.

      - A grey field means that the field is disabled and you can't
        enter a value. The cursor will automatically jump to the next
        open field.

      - To move to the next field, press the Tab key or the Down Arrow
        key.

      - To move back to the previous field, press Shift+Tab or the Up
        Arrow key.

      - If you type in an invalid value, for example a character in a
        field that only accepts numeric values, you'll get a pop-up that
        explains the problem and the field will be coloured yellow (not
        saved) until you have corrected the value.

      - If you have defined a minimum maximum value range for the field
        and you enter a value that is outside this range, you'll get a
        pop-up message that says the value is out of range. The value
        remains unsaved until you've changed the value or updated the
        value range and then re-entered the value.

6.  When you've filled in the form, click **Run validation** in the top
    right corner or below the data entry form.

    All validation rules which involves data elements in the current
    data entry form (data set) are then run against the new data. If
    there are no violations of the validation rules, you'll see a
    message saying *The data entry screen successfully passed
    validation*. If there are validation violations, they will be
    presented in a list.

    ![](resources/images/dhis2UserManual/Validation_Rule_Result.png)

7.  (Opcional) Corregir las violaciones de validación.

    > **Note**
    > 
    > Zero (0) will delete the value if the data element has been
    > configured to not store zeros.

8.  When you've corrected errors and you're done with data entry, click
    **Complete**.

    The system uses this information when generating completeness
    reports for district, county, province or the national level.

## Mark a data value for follow-up { #mark_data_for_followup_in_data_entry_form } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:mark_data_for_followup_in_data_entry_form-->

![](resources/images/data_entry/data_entry_section_history.png)

If you for example have a suspicious value that you need to investigate
further, you can keep it the system, but mark it for follow-up. In the
**Data Quality** app you can then run a follow-up analysis to view and
correct all marked values.

1.  Abra la aplicación **Entrada de datos**.

2.  Abra un formulario de entrada de datos existente.

3.  Double-click the field with the value you want to mark for
    follow-up.

4.  Click en icono de estrella.

## Edit data values in a completed data entry form { #edit_data_value_in_completed_form } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:edit_data_value_in_completed_form-->

1.  Abra la aplicación **Entrada de datos**.

2.  Abra un formulario de entrada de datos existente.

3.  Click en **Incompleto**.

4.  Cambie los valores de datos relevantes.

    > **Note**
    > 
    > Zero (0) will delete the value if the data element has been
    > configured to not store zeros,

5.  Click en **Completo**.

## Display a data value's history { #display_data_value_history } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:display_data_value_history-->

![](resources/images/data_entry/data_entry_section_history.png)

Puede mostrar los últimos 12 valores registrados para un campo.

1.  Abra la aplicación **Entrada de datos**.

2.  Abra un formulario de entrada de datos existente.

3.  Double-click the field with the value you want to view the history
    for.

4.  Haga clic en **Historial de elementos de datos**.

## Display a data value's audit trail { #display_data_value_audit_trail } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:display_data_value_audit_trail-->

![](resources/images/data_entry/data_entry_audit_trail.png)

The audit trail allows you to view other data values which have been
entered prior to the current value. The audit trail also shows when the
data value was altered and which user who made the changes.

1.  Abra la aplicación **Entrada de datos**.

2.  Abra un formulario de entrada de datos existente.

3.  Double-click the field with the value you want to view the audit
    trail for.

4.  Haga clic en **Registro de auditoría**

## Create minimum maximum value range manually { #change_min_max_range_manually } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:change_min_max_range_manually-->

![](resources/images/data_quality/set_min_max_manually.png)

1.  En la aplicación **Entrada de datos**, abra un formulario de entrada de datos.

2.  Double-click the field for which you want to set the minimum maximum
    value range.

3.  Introduzca el **límite mínimo** y el **límite máximo**.

4.  Click en **Guardar**.

    If values don't fall within the new value range the next time you
    enter data, the data entry cell will appear with an orange
    background.

5.  (Optional) Type a comment to explain the reason for the discrepancy,
    for example an event at a facility which may have generated a large
    number of clients.

6.  (Opcional) Click en **Guardar comentario**.

> **Tip**
> 
> Click the star icon to mark the value for further follow-up.

## Enter data offline { #enter_data_offline } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:enter_data_offline-->

The **Data Entry** app works even if you don't have a stable Internet
connection during data entry. When you don't have an internet
connection, the data you enter is saved to your local computer. When the
Internet connection is back, the app will push the data to the server.
The total bandwidth usage is reduced since data entry forms no longer
are retrieved from the server for each rendering.

> **Note**
> 
> To use this functionality, you must login to the server while you've
> an Internet connection.

  - When you're connected to the Internet, the app displays this message
    at the top of the data entry form:

    ![](resources/images/data_entry/data_entry_online1.png)

  - If your Internet connection breaks during data entry, the app
    detects it and displays this message:

    ![](resources/images/data_entry/data_entry_offline1.png)

    Now your data will be stored locally. You can continue to enter data
    as normal.

  - Once you have entered all necessary data and the app detects that
    the Internet connection is back, you'll see this message:

    ![](resources/images/data_entry/data_entry_offline_upload.png)

    Click en **Subir** para sincronizar los datos con el servidor

  - When the data has successfully synchronized with the server, you'll
    see this confirmation
    message:

    ![](resources/images/data_entry/data_entry_offline_upload_success1.png)

## Enable multi-organisation unit data entry { #data_entry_multiple_organisation_units } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:data_entry_multiple_organisation_units-->

![](resources/images/data_entry/data_entry_multiple_org_unit.png)

It can be useful to enter data for multiple organisation units in the
same data entry form, for instance if there are few data elements in the
form and a huge number of organisation units in the hierarchy. In that
case, you can enable multi-organisation unit data entry.

> **Note**
> 
> Multi-organisation unit data entry only works for section forms.

1.  Abril la aplicación **Configuración del Sistema**

2.  Seleccione **Habilitar formularios de unidades multiorganizativas**.

3.  In the **Data Entry** app, select the organisation unit immediately
    above the organisation unit you want to enter data for in the
    organisation unit hierarchy.

    Data elements will appear as columns and organisation units as rows
    in the form.

    > **Note**
    > 
    > The data entry forms should still be assigned to the facilities
    > that you actually enter data for, that is the organisation units
    > now appearing in the form.

## See also { #data_entry_app_see_also } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:data_entry_app_see_also-->

  - [Control data
    quality](https://docs.dhis2.org/master/en/user/html/control_data_quality.html)

  - [Manage data sets and data entry
    forms](https://docs.dhis2.org/master/en/user/html/manage_data_set.html)

  - [Using the Maintenance
    app](https://docs.dhis2.org/master/en/user/html/maintenance_app.html)



# Using the Capture app { #capture_app } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:capture_app-->

## About the Capture app { #about_capture_app } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:about_capture_app-->

The Capture app serves as a replacement for the Event Capture app. In the future, the intention is to incorporate the Tracker Capture app and the Data Entry app into the Capture app.

In the Capture app you register events that occurred at a particular time and place. An event can happen at any given point in time. This stands in contrast to routine data, which can be captured for predefined, regular intervals. Events are sometimes called cases or records. In DHIS2, events are linked to a program. The Capture app lets you select the organisation unit and program and specify a date when a event happened, before entering information for the event.

## Register an event { #capture_register_event } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:capture_register_event-->

1. Abrir la aplicación **Capturar**.

2. Seleccionar una unidad organizativa.

3. Seleccionar un programa.

    You'll only see programs associated with the selected organisation
    unit and programs you've access to, and that is shared with your user group through data level sharing.

4. Si el programa tiene una combinación de categorías, la opción de categoría deberá seleccionarse.

5. Click en **Nuevo**.

      ![create new event](resources/images/capture_app/create_new_event.png)

6. Completar la información requerida.
    If the programs program stage is configured to capture a location:

    - If the field is a coordinate field you can either enter the coordinates
    directly or you can click the **map** icon to the left of the coordinate field.
    The latter one will open a map where you can search for a location or set on
    directly by clicking on the map.

    - If the field is a polygon field you can click the **map** icon to the left of
    the field. This will open a map where you can search for a location and capture
    a polygon (button in the upper rigth corner of the map).

7. Si lo desea, puede agregar un comentario haciendo click en el botón **Escribir comentario** en la parte inferior del formulario.

8. If desired you can add a relationship by clicking the **Add relationship** button at the bottom of the form.
   See the section about **Adding a relationship** for more information.

9. Click en **Guardar y salir** o click en la flecha junto al botón para seleccionar **Guardar y agregar otro**.
    - **Save and add another** will save the current event and clear the form.
    All the events that you have captured will be diplayed in a list at the bottom of the page.
    When you want to finish capturing events you can, if the form is blank,
    click the finish button or if your form contains data click the arrow
    next to **Save and add another** and select **Save and exit**.

> Note 1: Some data elements in an event might be mandatory (marked with a red star next to the data element lable).
> What this means is that all mandatory data elements must be filled in before the user is allowed to complete the event.
> The exception to this is if the user has the authority called __"Ignore validation of required fields in Tracker and Event Capture".__
> If the user has this authority, the mandatory data elements will not be required to be filled in before saving and
> the red star will not be displayed next to the data element lable. Note that super user that have the __"ALL"__ authority automatically
> have this authority.

> Note 2: The data entry form can also be diaplayed in **row view**. In this mode the data elements are arranged horizontally. This can be
> achived by clicking the **Switch to row view** button on the top right of the data entry form. If you are currently in **row view** you
> can switch to the default form view by clicking the **Switch to form view** button on the top right of the data entry form.

## Adding a relationship { #capture_add_relationship } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:capture_add_relationship-->

Relationships can be added either during registration, editing or viewing of an event.
Currently the **Capture App** only supports *Event to Tracked Entity Instance* relationships. 

1. While in an event, click **Add relationship**.

2. Select the relationship type you want to create.

- You now have two options: **Link to an existing Tracked Entity Instance** or **Create new Tracked Entity Instance**.

![relationship options](resources/images/capture_app/relationship_options.png)

### Link to an existing Tracked Entity Instance { #link-to-an-existing-tracked-entity-instance } 

3. Click **Link to an existing Tracked Entity Instance**.

- You should now be presented with some options for searching for a **Tracked Entity Instance**.
  You have the option to select a **program**. If a **program** is selected the attributes are derived from the selected **program**.
  If no **program** is selected, only the attributes that belong to the **Tracked Entity Instance** will be visible.

  ![search for Tracked Entity Instance](resources/images/capture_app/search_tei.png)

    - If the **Tracked Entity Instance** or **program** is configured with a unique attribute, this attribute can be
      used for finding a specific **Tracked Entity Instance** or **program**. This attribute should be presented alone.
      When the unique attribute field has been filled out, click the **Search** button located right below
      the unique attribute field.

    - If the **Tracked Entity Instance** or **program** has attibutes these can be used for searching by expanding the **Search by attributes** box.
      When all desired attribute fields have been filled out, click the **Search by attributes** button located at the bottom. You can also limit the search by setting the **Organisation unit scope**. If set to *All accessible* you will search for the **Tracked Entity Instance** in all organisation units you have access to. If you select *Selected*, you will be asked to select which organisation units to search within.

4. After a successful search you will be presented with a list of **Tracked Entity Instances** matching the search criteria.
   To create a relationship click the **Link** button on the **Tracked Entity Instance** you would like to create a relationship to.

- If you did not find the **Tracked Entity Instance** you were looking for, you can either click the **New search** or **Edit search** buttons.
  **New search** will take you to new blank search while **Edit search** will take you back to the search you just performed keeping the search criteria.

### Create new Tracked Entity Instance { #create-new-tracked-entity-instance } 

3. Click **Create new Tracked Entity Instance**.

- You are now presented with a form for registering a new **Tracked Entity Instance**. You can choose to either register with or without a program.
  If a program is selected, the new **Tracked Entity Instance** will be enrolled in said program. You can also change the **Organisation unit** by removing the one that is automatically set and selecting a new one.

  ![register new Tracked Entity Instance](resources/images/capture_app/register_tei.png)

4. Fill in the desired (and possibly mandatory) attributes and enrollment details.

5. Click **Create Tracked Entity Instance and Link**.

> Note: When filling in data you might face a warning telling you that a possible duplicate has been found. You can click the warning to see these 
> duplicates and if the duplicate is a match you can choose to link that **Tracked Entity Instance** by clicking the **Link** button.
> If the warning is still present when you are done filling in data, you will not see the **Create Tracked Entity Instance and Link** button.
> Instead you will be pressented with a button called **Review duplicates**. When you click this button a list of possible duplicates will be displayed.
> If any of these duplicates matches the **Tracked Entity Instance** you are trying to create you can click the **Link** button, if not you can click
> the **Save as new person** button to register a new **Tracked Entity Instance**.


## Edit an event { #capture_edit_event } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:capture_edit_event-->

1. Abrir la aplicación **Capturar**.

2. Seleccionar una unidad organizativa.

3. Seleccionar un programa.

    All events registered to the selected program show up in a list.

4. Click the event you want to modify.

5. Click the **Edit event** button.

6. Modify the event details and click **Save**.

## Delete an event { #capture_delete_event } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:capture_delete_event-->

1. Abrir la aplicación **Capturar**.

2. Seleccionar una unidad organizativa.

3. Seleccionar un programa.

    All events registered to the selected program show up in a list.

4. Click the **triple dot** icon on the event you want to delete.

5. In the menu that is displayed click **Delete event**.

    ![delete event](resources/images/capture_app/delete_event.png)

## Modify an event lists layout { #capture_modify_event_list_layout } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:capture_modify_event_list_layout-->

You can select which columns to show or hide in an event list. This can
be useful for example when you have a long list of data elements
assigned to a program stage.

1. Abrir la aplicación **Capturar**.

2. Seleccionar una unidad organizativa.

3. Seleccionar un programa.

    All events registered to the selected program show up in a list.

4. Click the **gear** icon on the top right of the event list.

5. Select the columns you want to display and click **Save**.

    ![modify event list](resources/images/capture_app/modify_event_list.png)

> Note: You can reorganize the order of the data elements by draging and dropping them in the list.

## Filter an event list { #capture_filter_event_list } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:capture_filter_event_list-->

1. Abrir la aplicación **Capturar**.

2. Seleccionar una unidad organizativa.

3. Seleccionar un programa.

    All events registered to the selected program show up in a list.

    Along the top of the event list are button with the same names as the column headers in the list.

4. Use the buttons on the top of the list to filter based on a report date or a specific data element.

    ![filter event](resources/images/capture_app/filter_event.png)

> Note: Data elements will have slightly diffrent way that they are filtered. A **Number** data element will for instance show a rang to filter on while a **Text** data element will ask you to enter a search query to filter on.

## Sort an event list { #capture_sort_event_list } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:capture_sort_event_list-->

1. Abrir la aplicación **Capturar**.

2. Seleccionar una unidad organizativa.

3. Seleccionar un programa.
    All events registered to the selected program show up in a list.

4. Click one of the column headers to sort the list on that data element in ascending order.

    A small upward arrow is displayed next to the column to show that the list is sorted in ascending order.

5. Click the column header again to sort the list on that data element in descending order.

     A small downward arrow is displayed next to the column to show that the list is sorted in descending order.

    ![sort event](resources/images/capture_app/sort_event.png)

## Download an event list { #capture_download_event_list } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:capture_download_event_list-->

1. Abrir la aplicación **Capturar**.

2. Seleccionar una unidad organizativa.

3. Seleccionar un programa.
    All events registered to the selected program show up in a list.

4. Click the **downward arrow** icon on the top right of the event list.

5. Select the format you want to download.

    ![download event list](resources/images/capture_app/download_event_list.png)

> Note: You can download an event list in JSON, XML or CSV formats.

## Working lists { #capture_working_lists } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:capture_working_lists-->

Working lists are list templates with predefined filters, columns and event sort order.

### View working list { #view-working-list } 

1. Seleccionar una unidad organizativa.

2. Select a program that has a working list associated with it.

3. The working list templates should be available above the event list itself.

   ![](resources/images/capture_app/working_lists_available.png)

4. Click on a working list template button to activate it.

    ![](resources/images/capture_app/working_list_active.png)

## User assignment { #capture_user_assignment } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:capture_user_assignment-->

Events can be assigned to users. This feature must be enabled per program.

### Assigning new events { #capture_user_assignment_new } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:capture_user_assignment_new-->

1. Select an organisation unit and a program with user assignment enabled.

2. Click **New Event** in the upper right corner.

3. You will find the assignee section near the bottom of the data entry page. Search for and select the user you would like to assign the event to. The assignee will be preserved when you save the event.

    ![](resources/images/capture_app/user_assignment_new.png)

    ![](resources/images/capture_app/user_assignment_new_filled.png)

### Change assignee { #capture_user_assignment_edit } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:capture_user_assignment_edit-->

1. Select an organisation unit and a program with user assignment enabled.

2. Click an event in the list

3. In the right column you will find the assignee section.

    ![](resources/images/capture_app/user_assignment_edit.png)

4. Click the edit button, or the **Assign** button if the event is not currently assigned to anyone.

    ![](resources/images/capture_app/user_assignment_edit_button.png)

    ![](resources/images/capture_app/user_assignment_edit_add.png)

5. Search for and select the user you would like to reassign the event to. The assignment is saved immediately.

### Assignee in the event list { #capture_user_assignment_event_list } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:capture_user_assignment_event_list-->

In the event list you will be able to view the assignee per event. Moreover, you can sort and filter the list by the assignee.

#### Filter by assignee { #filter-by-assignee } 

1. Click the **Assigned to** filter.

    ![](resources/images/capture_app/user_assignment_event_list.png)

2. Select your preferred assignee filter and then click update.

    ![](resources/images/capture_app/user_assignment_event_list_options.png)

## Tracker programs { #capture_tracker_programs } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:capture_tracker_programs-->

The Capture app doesn't support tracker programs yet, but the tracker programs are still listed. If you select a tracker program, the app will lead you to the Tracker Capture app as shown below.

![](resources/images/capture_app/tracker_program.png)


# Uso de la aplicación Captura de Eventos { #event_capture_app } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:event_capture_app-->

## Acerca de la aplicación Captura de Eventos { #about_event_capture_app } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:about_event_capture_app-->

![](resources/images/event_capture/event_list.png)

En la aplicación **Captura de Eventos**, se registran los eventos que ocurrieron en un
momento y lugar en particular. Un evento puede ocurrir en cualquier
momento. Esto contrasta con los datos de rutina, que pueden capturarse a
intervalos regulares predefinidos. Los eventos a veces se denominan casos o
registros. En DHIS2, los eventos están vinculados a un programa. La aplicación **Captura de Eventos**
permite seleccionar la unidad organizativa, el programa y especificar una fecha
en la que ocurrió un evento, antes de introducir la información para el evento.

La aplicación **Captura de Eventos** funciona en línea y sin conexión. Si la conectividad a Internet 
cae, puede continuar capturando eventos. Los eventos 
se almacenarán localmente en su navegador web (cliente). Cuando la conectividad haya 
regresado, el sistema le pedirá que cargue los datos almacenados localmente. Luego, 
el sistema envía los datos al servidor donde se almacenan los datos.

> **Nota**
> 
> Si cierra el navegador web mientras está en modo sin conexión, no es posible
> volver a abrir una nueva ventana del navegador web y continuar con la sesión de trabajo.
> Sin embargo, los datos aún se guardarán localmente y podrán cargarse en
> el servidor la próxima vez que la máquina esté en línea y haya iniciado sesión
> en el servidor.

  - Solo ve los programas asociados con la unidad organizativa que ha
    seleccionado y los programas a los que tiene acceso para ver a través de su rol de usuario.

  - Tanto la lógica de omisión como los mensajes de error/advertencia de validación son compatibles
    durante el registro.

  - Cuando cierra una unidad organizativa, no puede registrar ni editar
    eventos en esta unidad organizativa en la aplicación **Captura de Eventos**. Aún
    puede ver y filtrar la lista de eventos y ver los detalles de un
    evento.

  - Se admite la evaluación de la expresión del indicador sobre la marcha. Si un
    programa tiene indicadores definidos para él y en el momento en que todos los valores
    relacionados con la expresión del indicador se llenan, el sistema
    calculará el indicador y mostrará el resultado.

    ![](resources/images/event_capture/event_editing.png)

  - **Clasificación:** esto se puede hacer haciendo click en el icono de clasificación de cada
    encabezado de columna. Un icono de orden rojo indica la columna de ordenación
    actual. Sin embargo, la función orden solo funciona dentro de la
    página que se muestra. Actualmente, no es posible realizar la ordenación desde
    el lado del servidor.

  - **Filtrado:** esto se hace haciendo click en el pequeño icono de búsqueda que se muestra
    a la derecha del encabezado de cada columna. Al hacer click en ellos, se proporciona un campo de entrada
    para escribir un criterio de filtrado. El sistema comienza a aplicar el
    filtro en el momento en que un usuario comienza a escribir. Durante el filtrado, es
    posible definir fechas de inicio y finalización para los elementos de datos de tipo fecha
    y límites inferior y superior para los tipos de números. El filtrado del lado del servidor
    no es compatible en este momento.

## Registrar un evento { #event_capture_register_event } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:event_capture_register_event-->

1.  Abrir la aplicación **Captura de Eventos**.

2.  Seleccionar una unidad organizativa.

3.  Seleccionar un programa.

    Solo verá los programas asociados con la unidad organizativa seleccionada
    y los programas a los que tiene acceso a través de su rol de usuario.

4.  Click en **Registrar evento**.

5.  Seleccionar una fecha.

6.  Completar la información requerida.

    Si la etapa del programa está configurada para capturar coordenadas GPS
    puede introducir las coordenadas de dos maneras:

      - Introducir los valores directamente en los campos correspondientes.

      - Eligir una ubicación en un mapa. La opción de mapa también muestra
        polígonos y puntos definidos para unidades organizativas.

7.  Click en **Guardar y agregar nuevo** o **Guardar y volver**.

> Nota: Algunos elementos de datos en un evento pueden ser obligatorios (marcados con una estrella roja junto a la etiqueta del elemento de datos).
> Esto significa que todos los elementos de datos obligatorios deben ser llenados antes de que el usuario pueda guardar el evento.
> La excepción a esto es si el usuario tiene la autoridad llamada __"Ignorar la validación de los campos obligatorios en Tracker y Captura de Eventos".__
> Si el usuario tiene esta autoridad, los elementos de datos obligatorios no serán requeridos para ser llenados antes de guardar y
> la estrella roja no se mostrará al lado de la etiqueta del elemento de datos. Tenga en cuenta que el superusuario que tiene la autoridad __"ALL"__ automáticamente
> tiene esta autoridad.

## Editar un evento { #event_capture_edit_event } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:event_capture_edit_event-->

1.  Abrir la aplicación **Captura de Eventos**.

2.  Seleccionar una unidad organizativa.

3.  Seleccionar un programa.

    Todos los eventos registrados en el programa seleccionado se muestran en una lista.

4.  Click en el evento que desea modificar y seleccionar **Editar**.

5.  Modificar los detalles del evento y click en **Actualizar**.

## Editar eventos en la cuadrícula { #event_capture_edit_event_grid } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:event_capture_edit_event_grid-->

La función **Editar en cuadrícula** le permite editar un evento seleccionado dentro
de la tabla, pero solo aquellas columnas (elementos de datos) visibles en la cuadrícula. Si
necesita más columnas, use **Mostrar/ocultar columnas** para especificar qué
columnas deben mostrarse en la lista.

1.  Abrir la aplicación **Captura de Eventos**.

2.  Seleccionar una unidad organizativa.

3.  Seleccionar un programa.

    Todos los eventos registrados en el programa seleccionado se muestran en una lista.

4.  Click en el evento que desea modificar y seleccionar **Editar en cuadrícula**.

5.  Modificar los detalles del evento.

6.  Click en otro evento para cerrar el modo de edición.

## Compartir eventos en modo de edición { #event_capture_share_event_edit_mode } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:event_capture_share_event_edit_mode-->

Puede compartir un evento en modo de edición a través de su dirección web.

1.  Abrir la aplicación **Captura de Eventos**.

2.  Abrir el evento que desea compartir en modo de edición.

3.  Copiar la URL.

    Asegúrese de que la URL contenga los parámetros "evento" y "ou"
    (unidad organizativa).

4.  Pegar la URL en el método para compartir de su elección, por ejemplo, un
    correo electrónico o un mensaje dentro de DHIS2.

    If Si no ha iniciado sesión en DHIS2 cuando haga click en el enlace, se le
    pedirá que lo haga y se le llevará al panel de control.

## Ver un histórico de auditoría de evento { #event_capture_view_event_audit_history } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:event_capture_view_event_audit_history-->

1.  Abrir la aplicación **Captura de Eventos**.

2.  Seleccionar una unidad organizativa.

3.  Seleccionar un programa.

    Todos los eventos registrados en el programa seleccionado se muestran en una lista.

4.  Click en un evento y seleccione **Histórico de auditoría**.

## Eliminar un evento { #event_capture_delete_event } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:event_capture_delete_event-->

1.  Abrir la aplicación **Captura de Eventos**.

2.  Seleccionar una unidad organizativa.

3.  Seleccionar un programa.

    Todos los eventos registrados en el programa seleccionado se muestran en una lista.

4.  Haga clic en un evento y seleccione **Remover**.

5.  Click en **Remover** para confirmar la eliminación.

## Modificar el diseño de una lista de eventos { #event_capture_modify_event_list_layout } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:event_capture_modify_event_list_layout-->

Puede seleccionar qué columnas mostrar u ocultar en una lista de eventos. Esto puede
ser útil, por ejemplo, cuando tiene una lista larga de elementos de datos
asignados a una etapa del programa. Una vez que haya modificado el diseño, se guardará
en su perfil de usuario. Puede tener diferentes diseños para diferentes
programas.

1.  Abrir la aplicación **Captura de Eventos**.

2.  Seleccionar una unidad organizativa.

3.  Seleccionar un programa.

    Todos los eventos registrados en el programa seleccionado se muestran en una lista.

4.  Click en el icono **Mostrar/ocultar columnas**.

5.  Seleccionar las columnas que desea mostrar y click en **Cerrar**.

## Imprimir una lista de eventos { #event_capture_print_event_list } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:event_capture_print_event_list-->

1.  Abrir la aplicación **Captura de Eventos**.

2.  Seleccionar una unidad organizativa.

3.  Seleccionar un programa.

    Todos los eventos registrados en el programa seleccionado se muestran en una lista.

4.  Click en **Imprimir lista**.

## Descargar una lista de eventos { #event_capture_download_event_list } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:event_capture_download_event_list-->

1.  Abrir la aplicación **Captura de Eventos**.

2.  Seleccionar una unidad organizativa.

3.  Seleccionar un programa.

    Todos los eventos registrados en el programa seleccionado se muestran en una lista.

4.  Click en el icono **Descargar** y seleccione un formato.

    Puede descargar una lista de eventos en formato XML, JSON o CSV.



# Using the Tracker Capture app { #tracker_capture_app } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:tracker_capture_app-->

## About the Tracker Capture app { #about_tracker_capture_app } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:about_tracker_capture_app-->

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tracker-capture-tei-list.png)

The **Tracker Capture** app is an advanced version of the **Event
Capture** app.

  - **Event Capture**: handles single events *without* registration

  - **Tracker Capture**: handles multiple events (including single
    event) *with* registration.

  - You capture event data for a registered tracked entity instance
    (TEI).

  - Solo ve los programas asociados con la unidad organizativa que ha
    seleccionado y los programas a los que tiene acceso para ver a través de su rol de usuario.

  - The options you see in the search and register functions depend on
    the program you've selected. The program attributes control these
    options. The attributes also decide the columns names in the TEI
    list.

    If you don't select a program, the system picks default attributes.

  - Tanto la lógica de omisión como los mensajes de error/advertencia de validación son compatibles
    durante el registro.

  - Cuando cierra una unidad organizativa, no puede registrar ni editar
    events to this organisation unit in the **Tracker Capture** app. You
    can still search for TEIs and filter the search results. You can
    also view the dashboard of a particular TEI.

## About tracked entity instance (TEI) dashboards { #about_tracked_entity_instance_dashboard } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:about_tracked_entity_instance_dashboard-->

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tei_dashboard.png)

You manage a TEI from the TEI's dashboard in the **Tracker Capture** app.

  - The dashboard consist of widgets. Drag and drop the widgets to place
    them in the order and in the position you want.

  - Click the pin icon to stick the right column of widgets to a fix
    position. This is useful especially during data entry.

    If you have many data elements or big form to fill in, stick the
    right widget column. Then all the widgets you've placed in the right
    column remain visible while you scroll in the data entry part.

  - Any indicator defined for the program you've selected will have its
    value calculated and displayed in the **Indicators** widget.

  - Navigation:

      - **Back**: takes you back to the search and registration page

      - Previous and next buttons: takes you to the previous or next TEI
        dashboard in the TEI search results list

    <!-- end list -->

      - **Other programs** field: if the TEI is enrolled in other
        programs, they're listed here. Click a program to change the
        program for which you enter data for the selected TEI. When you
        change programs, the content in the widgets change too.

## Workflow { #workflow_tracker_capture } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:workflow_tracker_capture-->

Working process of Mother and child health
program

![](resources/images/patients_programs/name_based_information_tracking_process.png)

1.  Create new or find existing TEI.

    You can search on defined attributes, for example name or address.

2.  Enroll TEI in a program.

3.  Based on the services of the program by the time, the app creates an
    activity plan for the TEI.

4.  The TEI is provided with various services depending on the program.
    All services are recorded.

5.  Use information about the individual cases to create reports.

## Linking to the Tracker Capture App { #linking_to_the_tracker_capture_app } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:linking_to_the_tracker_capture_app-->

### Link to a specific program on the "home screen" { #link-to-a-specific-program-on-the-home-screen } 
You can share a program selection on the "home screen.

1. Open the **Tracker Capture** app.

2. Selecte the program you want to link to.

3. Copiar la URL.

    * Make sure that the URL contains the "program" parameter.

4. Pegar la URL en el método para compartir de su elección, por ejemplo, un
  correo electrónico o un mensaje dentro de DHIS2.

  > Note: If the program does not exist in the selected organisation unit (that is stored in the local cache) the system will instead
  > select the first available program for that organisation unit. If the local cache is empty/clean and the root organisation unit
  > of the current user does not have the specified program, the system will also here select the first available program for the root
  > organisation unit.

### Linking to TEI dashboard { #linking-to-tei-dashboard } 
You can share a TEI dashboard via its web address.

1.  Open the **Tracker Capture** app.

2.  Open the dashboard you want to share.

3.  Copiar la URL.

    Make sure that the URL contains "tei", "program" and "ou"
    (organisation unit) parameters.

4.  Pegar la URL en el método para compartir de su elección, por ejemplo, un
    correo electrónico o un mensaje dentro de DHIS2.

    If Si no ha iniciado sesión en DHIS2 cuando haga click en el enlace, se le
    pedirá que lo haga y se le llevará al panel de control.

## Create a TEI and enroll it in a program { #create_and_enroll_tracked_entity_instance } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_and_enroll_tracked_entity_instance-->

You can create a TEI and enroll that TEI to a program in one operation:

1.  Open the **Tracker Capture** app.

2.  In the organisation unit tree in the left hand pane, select an
    organisation unit.

3.  Seleccionar un programa.

4.  Click **Register**.

5.  Completar la información requerida.

    Both tracked entity type and program can be configured to use a feature type.
    This makes it possible to capture geometry for either the TEI or the enrollment.
    Supported feature type is Point and Polygon. Please see **How to use geometry**.

6. If the selected program is configured to display first stage during registation, 
   all mandatory fields in the stage will have to be filled in. At the end of the stage
   you will also be asked if you want to complete the stage that you have entered data for.
   If you select **Yes**, the stage will have the status completed once saved. If you select **No**, 
   the stage will have the staus active.

7.  If searching for program is configured, a background search will be
    performed on searchable fields to help you prevent registering
    duplicates. If there is any matching TEIs, a blue box will be
    displayed on the right side of the form with the possibility to view
    these matching
TEIs.

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tracker_capture_register_integrated_search.png)

If there is any matching TEIs, click **Continue** to review possible
duplicates before registering a new one.

If there is no matching TEIs, click **Save and continue** or **Save and
add new**

  - **Save and continue**: completes the registration and opens the
    registered TEI's dashboard

  - **Save and add new**: completes the registration but stays on the
    same page. Use this option when you want to register and enroll one
    TEI after another without enter data.

> Note: All mandatory attributes have to be filled in to be able to save. 
> Mandatory attributes are marked with a red star next to the attribute lable.
> If the user has the authority called __"Ignore validation of required fields in Tracker and Event Capture"__
> you will not be required to fill in the mandatory attributes and will 
> not see the red star next to the attribute lable. Note that super user 
> that have the __"ALL"__ authority automatically have this authority.

## Open an existing TEI dashboard { #open_existing_tracked_entity_instance_dashboard } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:open_existing_tracked_entity_instance_dashboard-->

There are multiple ways to find a TEI: Using the "Lists" which is
predefined lists in the current selection, or "Search" for global
lookup.

### Lists { #simple_tracked_entity_instance_search } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:simple_tracked_entity_instance_search-->

Lists is used to find and display TEIs in the selected organisation unit
and program.

1.  Open Tracked Capture app

2.  In the organisation unit tree in the left hand pane, select an
    organisation unit

3.  Select a program

4.  Click the "Lists" button if not already selected

If not configured, a set of predefined lists will be available:

1.  Any TEI with any enrollment status

2.  TEIs with an active enrollment of the current program

3.  TEIs with a completed enrollment of the current program

4.  TEIs with a cancelled enrollment of the current program

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tracker_capture_lists.png)

You can select which columns to show or hide in the lists for each
program. This will be saved in your user settings.

1.  Click the **grid** icon button

2.  Check the columns you want to include

3.  Click **Save**

There is also an option to create a custom working list with own
filters. This can be used to create custom lists on the fly.

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tracker_capture_lists_custom.png)

Lists can also be downloaded or printed.

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tracker_capture_lists_download.png)

#### Custom predefined lists { #custom-predefined-lists } 

If the program has any custom tracked entity filters associated with it,
these will take the place of the four predefined lists mentioned above.
The predefined lists will when well configured be an effective way to find
or work with the data relevant for the user in that program.

Working lists can be defined with a wide variety of options, here are some
examples:

- Display all TEIs with at least one event in a given program stage that
- has a due date on the current date.
- Display all TEIs that has at least one event that is assigned to the
- logged in user.
- Display all TEIs that is active, but is not assigned to any user.

![Predefined working lists in tracker capture](resources/images/tracker_capture/predefined_working_list_based_on_user_assignment.png)

See the API documentation for a full list of functionality supported for
these predefined tracked entity instance filters.

### Search { #advanced_tracked_entity_instance_search } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:advanced_tracked_entity_instance_search-->

Search is used to search for TEIs in the organisation units the user has
search access to. This can be used if you want to find a TEI, but you
dont know which organisation unit or program the TEI was enrolled in.
There are two ways of doing this: With and without a program context.
Searchable fields needs to be configured. For configuring searching with
program context, this is done individually for each program in the
program maintenance app. For configuring searching without a program
context, this is done individually for each tracked entity type in the
tracked entity type maintenance app.

**Searching without a program context:**

1.  Open **Tracker Capture app**

2.  Click the **Search** button

3.  Searchable fields will be displayed in groups. Unique attributes is
    only individually searchable. Non-unique attributes can be combined.

4.  Fill in search criteria and click the **search** icon button.

**Searching with a program context:**

1.  Open **Tracker Capture app**

2.  Select an organisation unit which has the program you wish to search
    in

3.  Select the program

4.  Click the **Search** button

5.  Searchable fields will be displayed in groups. Unique attributes is
    only individually searchable. Non-unique attributes can be combined.

6.  Fill in search criteria and click the **search** icon button

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tracker_capture_search_screen.png)

After the search has been done, you will be presented with the search
result. Whats displayed depends on the outcome of the search.

For unique attribute search:

  - If no matching TEI found, you will get the possibility to open the
    registration form.

  - If the TEI was found in the selected organisation unit, the TEI
    dashboard will automatically open.

  - If the TEI was found in outside the selected organisation unit, you
    will get the possibility to open the TEI.

For non-unique attributes search:

  - If no matching TEI's found, you will get the possibility to open the
    registration form.

  - If matching TEI's found, you can either click on any TEI in the
    result list, or open the registration form.

  - If a too large number of matches was found, you will be prompted to
    refine your search criteria

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tracker_capture_search_results.png)

The search results have functionality for flagging tracked entity instances
as possible duplicates, see next chapter.

When choosing to open the registration form, the search values will
automatically be filled into the registration form.

### Flagging tracked entity instance as potential duplicate { #flagging-tracked-entity-instance-as-potential-duplicate } 

When searching for tracked entity instances in the tracker capture app, the user
will sometimes suspect that one or more of the search hits are duplicates of
other tracked entity instances. The user has the option of clicking on the
**flag possible duplicate** link in the rightmost column of the search result grid.

Tracked entity instances flagged in this way will be marked as "possible duplicate"
in the DHIS2 database. The flag indicates that the tracked entity instance is/has a
duplicate. The presence of such a flag is visible to the user in two places. One is
the result list itself (in this example Mark Robinson is already flagged as a potential
duplicate):

![Tracker capture search results](resources/images/tracker_capture/tracker_capture_search_results.png)

The other place is within the tracked entity instance dashboard:

![Tracked entity instance flagged as duplicate](resources/images/tracker_capture/tracked_entity_instance_flagged_as_duplicate.png)

In addition to informing users about the tracked entity instance potentially
being a duplicate, the  flag will be used by the underlying system for finding and
merging duplicates in coming versions of DHIS2.

### Breaking the glass { #break_glass } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:break_glass-->

If the program is configured with access level **protected**, and the
user searches and finds tracked entity instances that is owned by
organisation unit that the user does not have data capture authority
for, the user is presented with the option of breaking the glass. The
user will gove a reason for breaking the glass, then gain temporary
ownership of the tracked entity
instance.

## Enroll an existing TEI in a program { #enroll_existing_tracked_entity_instance_in_program } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:enroll_existing_tracked_entity_instance_in_program-->

1.  Open the **Tracker Capture** app.

2.  Open an existing TEI dashboard.

3.  Seleccionar un programa.

4.  In the **Enrollment** widget, click **Add new**.

5.  Fill in the required information and click **Enroll**.

## Enter event data for a TEI { #enter_event_data_for_tracked_entity_instance } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:enter_event_data_for_tracked_entity_instance-->

### Widgets for data entry { #widgets-for-data-entry } 

####  { # } 

In a TEI dashboard, you enter event data in the **Timeline Data entry**
or **Tabular data entry** widgets.

<table>
<caption>Data entry widgets in the Tracker Capture app</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 31%" />
<col style="width: 68%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Widget name</p></th>
<th><p>Description</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Timeline Data entry</strong></p></td>
<td><p>For data entry using either default or custom forms.</p>
<p>Depending on program definition, in particular program stages, events will be displayed in a timely fashion. Clicking on any of them displays the corresponding data entry. If a stage needs new event, a plus icon is displayed for new event creation. To proceed with data entry, it is mandatory to have event date. Once an event date is specified it is not possible to change due date. The assumption is that by specifying event date, the event has already taken place. If the event hasn't occurred yet, it is possible to change due date - this is effectively doing nothing but rescheduling. The buttons at the bottom help to change the status of a selected event.</p>
<p>Another key feature from this widget is addition of multiple notes for an event. Normally data recording is through data elements, however there are cases where it is necessary to record additional information or comments. This is where the notes section comes handy. However it is not possible to delete a note. The idea is notes are more like log books. Both skip-logic and validation error/warning messages are supported during data entry.</p>
<p>Also included in the Timeline Data entry is the option to compare your data entry to previous entries. This can be enabled by clicking the &quot;Switch to compare form&quot; button (Two sheets of paper) in the top right corner of the Timeline Data entry widget.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Tabular data entry</strong></p></td>
<td><p>For tabular-style data entry.</p>
<p>The widget displays the list of program stages as left-hand side labels. Events will be listed in table for repeatable program stage, and allows for in-line edits of event data values.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### Creating an event { #creating-an-event } 

You can create an event for a TEI by:

1.  Open the **Tracker Capture** app.

2.  Open an existing TEI dashboard.

3.  In the **Timeline Data entry** or **Tabular data entry** widget,
    click the **+**-button.

4.  Select a **Programstage** and set a **Report date**.

    Program stages can be configured to use a feature type.
    This makes it possible to capture geometry for an event.
    Supported feature type is Point and Polygon. Please see **How to use geometry**.

5.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Schedule an event { #schedule-an-event } 

You can shedule an event for a future date by:

1.  Open the **Tracker Capture** app.

2.  Open an existing TEI dashboard.

3.  In the **Timeline Data entry** or **Tabular data entry** widget,
    click the **Calendar** icon.

4.  Select a **Programstage** and set a **Schedule date**.

5.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Refer an event { #refer-an-event } 

Sometimes it might be nessascary to refer a patient to a different
**Organisation unit**. To refer a TEI:

1.  Open the **Tracker Capture** app.

2.  Open an existing TEI dashboard.

3.  In the **Timeline Data entry** or **Tabular data entry** widget,
    click the **Arrow** icon.

4.  Select a **Programstage**, **Organisation unit** and set a
    ****Report date****.

5.  Click either **One-time referral** which will only refer TEI for one
    single event or **Move permanently** which will move TEI ownership
    to the selected **Organisation Unit**. Further access to the TEI
    will be based on the ownership organisation unit.

### Mandatory data elements in events { #mandatory-data-elements-in-events } 
Some data elements in an event might be mandatory (marked with a red star next to the data element lable).
What this means is that all mandatory data elements must be filled in before the user is allowed to complete the event.
The exception to this is if the user has the authority called __"Ignore validation of required fields in Tracker and Event Capture".__
If the user has this authority, the mandatory data elements will not be required to be filled in before saving and
the red star will not be displayed next to the data element lable. Note that super user that have the __"ALL"__ authority automatically
have this authority.

## How to use geometry { #how-to-use-geometry } 

Tracked entity type, program and program stage can be configured to
use a feature type. This makes it possible to capture geometry for a
TEI, program or event. Supported feature types are Point and Polygon.

### Capture coordinate { #capture-coordinate } 
**Option 1:** Fill in the latitude and longitude into the field.

**Option 2:**
1.  Click on the **map icon**
2.  Find the location you want by either searching or locating it on
    the map
3.  Right-click on the location you want, and choose **Set coordinate**
4.  Click **Capture** at the bottom

### Capture Polygon { #capture-polygon } 
1.  Click on the **map icon**
2.  Find the location you want by either searching or locating it on
    the map
3.  At the top left of the map, click the **polygon icon**
4.  Draw a polygon on the map. To finish, connect the last point with
    the first point
5.  Click **Capture** at the bottom

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/capture_geometry.png)

Polygons can also be deleted
1.  Click the **map icon**
2.  Click the **trash can icon** at the left side of the map, and select
    **Clear all**

## How to assign a user to an event { #how-to-assign-a-user-to-an-event } 

In the Maintenance App a program stage can be configured to allow user assignment.
If user assignment is enabled, you will be able to assign a user to an event.

1. Click the **Assigned user** field.
2. Scroll or search for a user.
3. Click the user.

## Manage a TEI's enrollments { #manage_tracked_entity_instance_enrollment } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:manage_tracked_entity_instance_enrollment-->
The Enrollment widget gives access to information and functionality
for the enrollment in the selected program.

![Enrollments widget](resources/images/tracker_capture/enrollment_widget.png)

### TEI ownership { #tei-ownership } 

The current ownership of all enrollments in the selected program is displayed
in the "Owned by" part of the enrollment widget. The ownership will always start
out as the organisation unit that first enrolled the TEI into the given program.

Ownership can be different for a TEIS different programs, for example one clinic can
follow up a patient in HIV, while another clinic follows up the same patient in MCH.

To update the ownership for a TEI/program combination, the user has to utilize the
referral functionality and select the "Move permanently" option while referring.

A user that has capture access to the organisation unit that is the current owner of the
TEI/Program will have write access to all enrollments for that TEI/Program combination.
A user that has search access to the organisation unit that is the current owner will have
access to search and find the TEI/Program combindation.

### Deactivate a TEI's enrollment { #deactivate_tracked_entity_instance_enrollment } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:deactivate_tracked_entity_instance_enrollment-->

If you deactivate a TEI dashboard, the TEI becomes 'read-only'. You
can't enter data, enroll the TEI or edit the TEI's profile.

1.  Open the **Tracker Capture** app.

2.  Open an existing TEI dashboard.

3.  In the **Enrollment** widget, click **Deactivate**.

4.  Click **Yes** to confirm.

### Activate a TEI's enrollment { #activate_tracked_entity_instance_enrollment } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:activate_tracked_entity_instance_enrollment-->

1.  Open the **Tracker Capture** app.

2.  Open an existing TEI dashboard.

3.  In the **Enrollment** widget, click **Activate**.

4.  Click **Yes** to
confirm.

### Mark TEI's enrollment as complete { #mark_tracked_entity_instance_enrollment_complete } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:mark_tracked_entity_instance_enrollment_complete-->

1.  Open the **Tracker Capture** app.

2.  Open an existing TEI dashboard.

3.  In the **Enrollment** widget, click **Complete**.

4.  Click **Yes** to
confirm.

### Reopen completed enrollment { #reopen_complete_tracked_entity_instance_enrollment } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:reopen_complete_tracked_entity_instance_enrollment-->

1.  Open the **Tracker Capture** app.

2.  Open an existing TEI dashboard.

3.  In the **Enrollment** widget, click **Reopen**.

4.  Click **Yes** to
confirm.

### Display TEI's enrollment history { #display_tracked_entity_instance_enrollment_history } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:display_tracked_entity_instance_enrollment_history-->

1.  Open the **Tracker Capture** app.

2.  Open an existing TEI dashboard.

3.  In the **Profile** widget, click the **Audit history** icon.

### Create a TEI enrollment note { #create_tracked_entity_instance_enrollment_note } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_tracked_entity_instance_enrollment_note-->

An enrollment note is useful to record information about for example why
an enrollment was cancelled.

1.  Open the **Tracker Capture** app.

2.  Open an existing TEI dashboard.

3.  In the **Notes** widget, type your note and click **Add**.

## Send a message to a TEI { #send_message_to_tracked_entity_instance } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:send_message_to_tracked_entity_instance-->

1.  Open the **Tracker Capture** app.

2.  Open an existing TEI dashboard.

3.  In the **Messaging** widget and select **SMS** or **E-mail**.

4.  Enter the required contact information.

    If the TEI's profile contains an e-mail address or a phone number,
    these fields are filled in automatically.

5.  Type a message.

6.  Click **Send**.

## Mark a TEI for follow-up { #mark_tracked_entity_instance_for_follow_up } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:mark_tracked_entity_instance_for_follow_up-->

You can use mark a TEI's enrollment for follow-up and then use this
status as a filter when you create **Upcoming events** and **Overdue
events** reports. This can be useful for example to monitor high-risk
cases during a pregnancy program.

1.  Open the **Tracker Capture** app.

2.  Open an existing TEI dashboard.

3.  In the **Enrollment** widget, click the **Mark for follow-up** icon.

## Edit a TEI's profile { #edit_tracked_entity_instance_profile } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:edit_tracked_entity_instance_profile-->

You edit a TEI's profile or tracked entity attributes in the **Profile**
widget.

1.  Open the **Tracker Capture** app.

2.  Open an existing TEI dashboard.

3.  In the **Profile** widget, click **Edit**.

4.  Modify the profile and click **Save**.

## Add a relationship to a TEI { #add_relationship_to_tracked_entity_instance } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:add_relationship_to_tracked_entity_instance-->

You can create a relationship from one TEI to another, for example
linking a mother and a child together or a husband and a wife. Depending
on how the relationship type is configured, the relative can inherit
attributes.

Assume there are two programs: Antenatal care for the mother and
Immunization for the child. If first name, last name and address
attributes are required for both programs, it is possible to configure
last name and address attributes as inheritable. Then during child
registration, there is no need to enter these inheritable attributes.
You can add them automatically based on the mother's value. If you want
to have a different value for the child, you can override the
automatically generated value.

1.  Open the **Tracker Capture** app.

2.  Open an existing TEI dashboard.

3.  In the **Relationships** widget, and click **Add**.

4.  Select a relationship type.

5.  Search for the relative and select it.

6.  Click en **Guardar**.

> Note: If the relationship is a bi-directional relationship, the relationship will be displayed in the TEI that the relationship
> was created in and in the TEI that the relationship was linked to. Also, if the relationship is bi-directional, each end of the
> relationship will have a unique name that will be displayed in the relationship widget under the "Relationship" column.

## Share a TEI dashboard { #share_tracked_entity_instance_dashboard } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:share_tracked_entity_instance_dashboard-->

You can share a TEI dashboard via its web address.

1.  Open the **Tracker Capture** app.

2.  Open the dashboard you want to share.

3.  Copiar la URL.

    Make sure that the URL contains "tei", "program" and "ou"
    (organisation unit) parameters.

4.  Pegar la URL en el método para compartir de su elección, por ejemplo, un
    correo electrónico o un mensaje dentro de DHIS2.

    If Si no ha iniciado sesión en DHIS2 cuando haga click en el enlace, se le
    pedirá que lo haga y se le llevará al panel de control.

## Deactivate a TEI { #deactivate_tracked_entity_instance } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:deactivate_tracked_entity_instance-->

If you deactivate a TEI, the TEI becomes 'read-only'. Data associated
with the TEI is not deleted.

1.  Open the **Tracker Capture** app.

2.  Open an existing TEI dashboard.

3.  In the top right corner, click the
    ![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tc_tei_red_icon.png) button \>
    **Deactivate**.

4.  Click **Yes** to confirm.

## Activate a TEI { #activate_tracked_entity_instance } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:activate_tracked_entity_instance-->

1.  Open the **Tracker Capture** app.

2.  Open an existing TEI dashboard.

3.  In the upper top corner, click the
    ![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tc_tei_red_icon.png) button \>
    **Activate**.

4.  Click **Yes** to confirm.

## Delete a TEI { #delete_tracked_entity_instance } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:delete_tracked_entity_instance-->

> **Warning**
> 
> When you delete a TEI, you delete all data associated with the TEI.

1.  Open the **Tracker Capture** app.

2.  Open an existing TEI dashboard.

3.  In the top right corner, click the
    ![](resources/images/tracker_capture/tc_tei_red_icon.png) button \>
    **Delete**.

4.  Click **Yes** to
confirm.

## Configure the TEI dashboard { #configure_tracked_entity_instance_dashboard } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:configure_tracked_entity_instance_dashboard-->

### Show or hide widgets { #tracked_entity_instance_dashboard_show_hide_widget } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:tracked_entity_instance_dashboard_show_hide_widget-->

1.  Open the **Tracker Capture** app.

2.  Open an existing TEI dashboard.

3.  Click the **Settings** icon, and select **Show/hide widgets**.

4.  Select the widgets you want to show or hide.

5.  Click en **Cerrar**.

### Save the dashboard's layout as default { #tracked_entity_instance_dashboard_save_layout } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:tracked_entity_instance_dashboard_save_layout-->

You can save the dashboard's layout as default for a program.

1.  Open the **Tracker Capture** app.

2.  Open an existing TEI dashboard.

3.  Click the **Settings** icon, and select **Save dashboard layout as
    default**.

### Lock dashboard's layout { #lock-dashboards-layout } 

If you are the **administrator** you have the option of locking the
layout of the dashboard for all users.

1.  Open the **Tracker Capture** app.

2.  Open an existing TEI dashboard.

3.  Organize the widgets to the desired layout and save it as default
    (see section above).

4.  Click the **Settings** icon, and select **Lock layout for all
    users**.

Users will still be able to reorganize the widgets temporarily, but the
layout will be reset to the admin's saved layout after page refresh. The
remove widget buttons will be hidden when the dashboard layout is
locked.

### Top bar { #top-bar } 

The top bar can be a helpful tool to see important data in a quick and
easy way. To start using the top bar:

1.  Open the **Tracker Capture** app.

2.  Open an existing TEI dashboard.

3.  Click the **Settings** icon, and select **Top bar settings**.

4.  Click **Activate top bar** and click the data you would like to
    display in the top bar.

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/top_bar.png)

### Change table display mode for **Timeline Data Entry** widget { #change-table-display-mode-for-timeline-data-entry-widget } 

The **Timeline Data Entry** widget has 5 diffrent table display modes that can be selected. The different options are:
- **Default form** - Shows all data elements verticaly.

- **Compare form previous** - Shows the prevoius (repeatable) program stage next to the current selected program stage.

- **Compare form all** - Shows all prevoius (repeatable) program stages next to the current selected program stage.

- **Grid form** - Shows the data elements horizontaly.

- **POP-over form** - The same as **Grid form**, but when clicked the data elements are displayed in a pop-up.

To change the current display mode, click the second icon in the widgets top bar (see image below):

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/compareForm.png)

Once an option is selected the selection is stored for that spesific program stage. This mean that you can have different table modes for the different program stages in a program.  

> **Notes:**
> 1.  *The **Compare form** options will function best if you have multipe repeatable events (of the same program stage) present.*
> 2.  *The **Grid form** and **POP-over form** options are not selectable if the program stage has more than 10 data elements.*
> 3.  *The icon in the widgets bar will change depending on the option you have selected.*

## Create reports { #create_report_tracker_capture } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_report_tracker_capture-->

1.  Open the **Tracker Capture** app.

2.  Click **Reports**.

3.  Select a report type.

    <table>
    <caption>Report types in the Tracker Capture app</caption>
    <colgroup>
    <col style="width: 50%" />
    <col style="width: 50%" />
    </colgroup>
    <thead>
    <tr class="header">
    <th>Report type</th>
    <th>Description</th>
    </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>Program summary</p></td>
    <td><p>A summary report for a particular program, organisation unit and time frame. The report consist of a list of TEIs and their records organised based on program stages.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p>Program statistics</p></td>
    <td><p>A statistics report for a particular program. The report provides for example an overview of drop-outs or completion rates in a given time frame at a particular organisation unit.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>Upcoming events</p></td>
    <td><p>A tabular report showing tracked entity instances and their upcoming events for a selected program and time. You can sort the columns and search the values. Show/hide operations are possible on the columns. You can also export the table to Microsoft Excel.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p>Overdue events</p></td>
    <td><p>A list of events for a selected program. The report displays a list of TEIs and their events that are not completed on time. You can sort the columns and search the values You can also export the table to Microsoft Excel.</p></td>
    </tr>
    </tbody>
    </table>

![](resources/images/tracker_capture/program_summary_report.png)

The summary report displays a list of TEIs and their records for
"MNCH/PNC (Adult Woman)" program. The records are organized in the form
of tabs where each tab is a program stage. The columns in the table are
data elements which are configured to be displayed in reports under
program stage definition.


# Data approval { #data_approval } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:data_approval-->

DHIS2 has an optional feature that allows authorized users to approve
data that has been entered. It allows data to be reviewed and approved
at selected levels in the organisation unit hierarchy, so the approval
follows the structure of the hierarchy from lower levels to higher
levels.

Data is approved for a combination of (a) period, (b) organisation unit
and (c) workflow. Data may be approved for the organisation unit for
which it is entered, as well as for higher-level organisation units to
which the data is aggregated. As part of system settings, you can choose
the organisation unit level(s) at which data is approved. It can be
approved at higher levels only after it has been approved for all that
organisation unit's descendants at lower levels for the same workflow
and period. When you approve a workflow, it approves data for any data
sets that have been assigned to that workflow.

After a period, organisation unit and workflow combination has been
approved, data sets associated with that workflow will be locked for
that period and organisation unit, and any further data entry or
modification will be prohibited unless it is first un-approved.

For example, the following diagram illustrates that data has already
been approved for organisation units C and D, for a given period and
workflow. It may now be approved for organisation unit B for the same
period and workflow. But it is not ready to be approved for organization
unit A. Before it can be approved for organisation unit A, it must be
approved for B, and for any other children of organisation unit A, for
that period and workflow.


![Aprobación en unidades
organizativas](resources/images/data_approval/approval_hierarchy.png){.center width=50% }

## Approving and accepting { #data_approvals_approving_accepting } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:data_approvals_approving_accepting-->

DHIS2 supports two different types of approval processes: either a
one-step process where the data is approved at each level, or a two-step
process where data is first approved and then accepted at each level.
This is illustrated in the following diagram:

![Approving and
accepting](resources/images/data_approval/approval_level_steps.png){.center width=69% }

In the one-step process, data is approved at one level, and then
approved at the next higher level. Until it is approved at the next
higher level, it may be unapproved at the first level. (For example, if
the data was approved my mistake, this allows the approver to undo their
mistake.) Once the data is approved at the next higher level, it may not
be unapproved at the lower level unless it is first unapproved at the
higher level.

In the two-step process, data is approved at one level, and then the
approval is accepted at the same level. This acceptance is done by a
user who is authorized to approve data at the next higher level. Once
the data is accepted, it may not be changed or unapproved unless it is
first *unaccepted*.

The two-step process is not required by DHIS2. It is an optional step
for a user reviewing data at the next higher level. It has the benefit
of locking the acceptance from the level below, so reviewer does not
have to worry that the data could be changing from below while it is
being reviewed. It can also be used by the higher-level user to keep
track of which lower-level data has already been reviewed.

Two-step process can be activated by checking **Acceptance required
before approval** in SystemSettings app under General section.



## Authorities for approving data { #data_approvals_authorities } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:data_approvals_authorities-->

To approve data, you must be assigned a role containing one of these
authorities:

  - **Approve data** - You may approve data for the organisation unit(s)
    to which you are assigned. Note that this authority does not allow
    you to approve data for lower-levels below the organisation unit(s)
    to which you are assigned. This is useful to separate the users
    authorized to approve at one level from the users authorized to
    approve at levels below.

  - **Approve data at lower levels** - Allows you to approve data for
    all lower levels below the organisation units assigned to you. This
    is useful if, for example, you are a district-level user whose role
    includes approving the data for all the facilities within that
    district, but not for the district itself. If you are assigned this
    as well as the *Approve data* authority, you may approve data at the
    level of the organisation unit(s) to which you have been assigned,
    and for any level below.

  - **Accept data at lower levels** - Allows you to accept data for the
    level just below the organisation unit(s) assigned to you. This
    authority can be given to the same users as approve data. Or it may
    be given to different users, if you want to have some users who
    accept data from the level below, and a different set of users who
    approve data to go up to the next level above.

## Configuring data approval { #data_approvals_configuration } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:data_approvals_configuration-->

In the *Maintenance app* section under *Data approval level* you can
specify the levels at which you want to approve data in the system.
Click the Add new button on this page and select the organisation unit
level at which you want approvals. It will be added to the list of
approval settings. You may configure the system for approving data at
every organisation unit level, or only at selected organisation unit
levels.

Note that when you add a new approval level, you may optionally choose a
Category option group set. This feature is discussed later in this
chapter.

Also in maintenance under *Data approval workflow*, you can define the
workflows that will be used for approving data. Each workflow can be
associated with one or more approval levels. Any two workflows may
operate at all the same approval levels as each other, some of the same
and some different levels, or completely different levels.

If you want data for a data set to be approved according to a workflow,
then assign the workflow to the data set when you add or edit the data
set. If you do not want data for a data set to be subject to approval,
then do not assign any workflow to that data set. For data sets that you
want to approve at the same time as each other, assign them to the same
workflow. For data sets that you want to approve independently, assign
each data set to its own workflow.

On the *System Approval Settings* page, you may select the option *Hide
unapproved data in analytics* to hide unapproved data in reports, pivot
table, data visualizer and GIS. If this option is checked, unapproved
data will be hidden from users assigned to higher-level organisation
units compared to where approval is required. Users who are assigned to
organisation units where data is ready for approval can still view the
data, as can users assigned to higher-level organisation units if they
have the *Approve data at lower levels* authority. If this option is not
checked, then all data is shown whether approved or not.

## Data visibility { #data_approvals_data_visibility } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:data_approvals_data_visibility-->

If the option *Hide unapproved data in analytics* is enabled, data will
be hidden from viewing by users associated with higher levels. When
determining whether a data record should be hidden for a specific user,
the system associates a user with a specific approval level and compares
it to the level to which the data record has been approved up to. A user
is associated with the approval level which matches the level of the
organisation unit(s) she is linked to, or if no approvel level exists at
that level, the next approval level linked to an organisation unit level
below herself. A user will be allowed to see data which has been
approved up to the level immediately below her associated approval
level. The rationale behind this is that a user must be ablet to view
the data that has been approved below so that she can eventually view
and approve it herself.

Note that if the user has been granted the *View unapproved data* or the
*ALL* authority she will be able to view data irrespective of the
approval status.

*Lets consider the following example:* There are four organisation unit
levels, with approval levels associated with level 2 and 4. *User A* at
country level (1) gets associated with approval level 1 since the
approval level exists at the same level as the organisation unit level.
*User B* gets associated with approval level 2 since there is no
approval level directly linked to her organisation unit level and
approval level 2 is the immediate level below. *User C* gets associated
with approval level 2. *User D* is below all approval levels which
implies that she can see all data entered at or below her organisation
unit level.

![Hiding of unapproved
data](resources/images/data_approval/approval_data_hiding.png){.center}

Using this example, lets consider some scenarios:

  - Data is entered at facility level: Only *User D* can see the data,
    as the data has not yet been approved at all.

  - Data is approved by *User D* at facility level: Data becomes visible
    to User C and User B, as the data is now approved at their level.

  - Data is approved by *User C* at district level: Data becomes visible
    to User A, as data is now approved at the level immediately below
    herself.



## Approving data { #data_approvals_approving_data } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:data_approvals_approving_data-->

To approve data, go to *Reports* and choose *Data Approval*. When this
report shows data that is configured for approval, it shows the approval
status of the data in the report. The approval status will be one of the
following:

  - **Waiting for lower level org units to approve** - This data is not
    yet ready to be approved, because it first needs to be approved for
    all the child organisation units to this organisation unit, for the
    same workflow and period.

  - **Ready for approval** - This data may now be approved by an
    authorized user.

  - **Approved** - This data has already been approved.

  - **Approved and accepted** - This data has already been approved, and
    also accepted.

If the data you are viewing is in an approval state that can be acted
upon, and if you have sufficient authority, one or more of the following
actions will be available to you on the *Data Approval* form:

  - **Approve** - Approve data that has not yet been approved, or that
    was formerly approved and has been unapproved.

  - **Unapprove** - Return to an unapproved state data that has been
    approved or accepted.

  - **Accept** - Accept data that has been approved.

  - **Unaccept** - Return to an unaccepted (but still approved) state
    data that has been accepted.

In order to unapprove data for a given organisation unit, you must have
the authority to approve data for that organisation unit or to approve
data for a higher-level organisation unit to which that data is
aggregated. The reason for this is as follows: If you are reviewing data
for approval at a higher organisation unit level, you should consider
whether the data at lower organisation units are reasonable. If all
lower-level data looks good, you can approve the data at the higher
level. If some lower-level data looks suspect, you can unapprove the
data at the lower level. This allows the data to be reviewed again at
the lower level, corrected if necessary, and re-approved up through the
organisation unit levels according to the hierarchy.

## Approving by category option group set { #data_approvals_approving_by_cogs } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:data_approvals_approving_by_cogs-->

When defining an approval level, you specify the organisation unit level
at which data will be approved. You may also optionally specify a
category option group set. This is useful if you are using category
option groups to define additional dimensions of your data, and you want
approvals to be based on these dimensions. The following examples
illustrate how this can be done within a single category option group
set, and by using multiple category option group sets.

### Approving by one category option group set { #approving-by-one-category-option-group-set } 

For example, suppose you define a category option group set to represent
NGOs who serve as healthcare partners at one or more organisation units.
Each category option group within this set represents a different
partner. The category option group for Partner 1 may group together
category options (such as funding account codes) that are used by that
partner as a dimension of the data. So data entered by Partner 1 is
attributed to a category option in Partner 1's category option group.
Whereas data entered by partner 2 is attributed to a category option in
Partner 2's category option group:

<table align="center">
<caption>Example Category Option Groups</caption>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Category option group set</th>
<th>Category option group</th>
<th>Category options</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Partner</td>
<td>Partner 1</td>
<td>Account 1A, Account 1B</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Partner</td>
<td>Partner 2</td>
<td>Account 2A, Account 2B</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Each partner could enter data for their accounts independently of the
other, for the same or different workflows, at the same or different
facilities. So for example, data can be entered and/or aggregated at the
following levels for each partner, independently of each other:

![Example category option
groups](resources/images/data_approval/approval_partner_example.png){.center}

> **Tip**
> 
> You can use the sharing feature on category options and category
> option groups to insure that a user can enter data (and/or see data)
> only for certain category options and groups. If you don't want users
> to see data that is aggregated beyond of their assigned category
> options and/or category option groups, you can assign *Selected
> dimension restrictions for data analysis*, when adding or updating a
> user.

You can optionally define approval levels for partner data within any or
all of these organisation unit levels. For example, you could define any
or all of the following approval levels:

<table align="center">
<caption>Example Category Option Group Set approval levels</caption>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Approval level</th>
<th>Organisation unit level</th>
<th>Category option group set</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>1</td>
<td>Country</td>
<td>Partner</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>2</td>
<td>District</td>
<td>Partner</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>3</td>
<td>Facility</td>
<td>Partner</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>



## Approving by multiple category option group sets { #approving-by-multiple-category-option-group-sets } 

You can also define approval levels for different category option group
sets. To continue the example, suppose that you have various agencies
that manage the funding to the different partners. For example, Agency A
funds accounts 1A and 2A, while Agency B funds accounts 1B and 2B. You
could set up category option groups for Agency A, and Agency B, and make
them both part of a category option group set called Agency. So you
would have:

<table align="center">
<caption>Example Multiple Category Option Group Sets</caption>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Category option group set</th>
<th>Category option group</th>
<th>Category options</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Partner</td>
<td>Partner 1</td>
<td>Account 1A, Account 1B</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Partner</td>
<td>Partner 2</td>
<td>Account 2A, Account 2B</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Agency</td>
<td>Agency A</td>
<td>Account 1A, Account 2A</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Agency</td>
<td>Agency B</td>
<td>Account 1B, Account 2B</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Now suppose that at the country level, you want each partner to approve
the data entered by that partner. Once this approval is done, you want
each agency to then approve the data from accounts that are managed by
that agency. Finally, you want to approve data at the country level
across all agencies. You could do this by defining the following
approval levels:

<table align="center">
<caption>Example Multiple Category Option Group Set approval levels</caption>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Approval level</th>
<th>Organisation unit level</th>
<th>Category option group set</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>1</td>
<td>Country</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>2</td>
<td>Country</td>
<td>Agency</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>3</td>
<td>Country</td>
<td>Partner</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Note that multiple approval levels can be defined for the same
organisation unit level. In our example, Partner 1 would approve
country-wide data at approval level 3 from category options Account 1A
and Account 1B. Next, Agency A would approve country-wide data at
approval level 2 from category options Account 1A (after approval by
Partner 1) and Account 2A (after approval by Partner 2.) Finally, after
approval from all agencies, country-wide data can be approved at
approval level 1 across all category options. Note that approval level 1
does not specify a category option group set, meaning that it is for
approving data across all category options.

This example is meant to be illustrative only. You may define as many
category option groups as you need, and as many approval levels as you
need at the same organisation unit level for different category option
group sets.

If you have multiple approval levels for different category option group
sets at the same organisation unit level, you may change the approval
ordering in the *Settings* section, under *System Approval Settings*.
Just click on the approval level you wish to move, and select *Move up*
or *Move down*. If you have an approval level with no category option
groups set, it must be the highest approval level for that organisation
unit level.





# Reporting functionality in the reports app { #using_the_reports_app } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:using_the_reports_app-->

La aplicación de informes permite informes listos para usar, informes estándar, informes a partir de set de datos, recursos e informes de distribución de unidades organizativas.

## Using standard reports { #standard_reports_in_the_beta_reports_app } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:standard_reports_in_the_beta_reports_app-->

You access the available reports by navigating to Apps-\>Reports (Beta). In the
report menu in the left bar, click Standard Report. A list of all
pre-defined reports will appear in the main window.


![](resources/images/dhis2UserManual/react_reports_app_standard_reports.png)

You run/view a report by clicking on the triple-dot icon of the report and then
selecting "Create" from the contextual menu. If there are any
pre-defined parameters, you will see a report parameter window where you
must fill in the values needed for orgunit and/or reporting month,
depending on what has been defined in the underlying report table(s).
Click on "Generate Report" when you are ready. The report will either appear
directly in your browser or be available as a PDF file for download,
depending on your browser settings for handling PDF files. You can save
the file and keep it locally on your computer for later use.

## Using dataset reports { #dataset_reports_in_the_beta_reports_app } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:dataset_reports_in_the_beta_reports_app-->

Dataset reports are printer friendly views of the data entry screen
filled with either raw or aggregated data. These are only available for
data sets that have custom data entry forms and not for default or
section forms.

You can access data set reports from Apps-\>Reports (Beta).

A Criteria window will appear where you fill in the details for your
report:

**Set de datos:** El set de datos que desea mostrar.

**Report period:** The actual period you want data for. This can be
aggregated as well as raw periods. This means that you can ask for a
quarterly or annual report even though the data set is collected
monthly. A data set's period type (collection frequency) is defined in
data set maintenance. First select the period type (Monthly, Quarterly,
Yearly etc.) in the drop down next to Prev and Next buttons, and then
select one of the available periods from the dropdown list below. Use
Prev and Next to jump one year back or forward.

**Use data for selected unit only:** Use this option if you want a
report for an orgunit that has children, but only want the data
collected directly for this unit and not the data collected by its
children. If you want a typical aggregated report for an orgunit you do
not want to tick this option.

**Report Organisation unit:** Here you select the orgunit you want
the report for. This can be at any level in the hierarchy as the data
will be aggregated up to this level automatically (if you do not tick
the option above).

When you are done filling in the report criteria you click on
"Generate". The report will appear as HTML in a printer-friendly format.
Use the print and save as functions in the browser to print or save (as
HTML) the report.You can also export the data set report in Excel and
PDF formats.

## Using reporting rate summary { #reporting_rate_summary_in_the_beta_reports_app } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:reporting_rate_summary_in_the_beta_reports_app-->

Access the reporting rate summary from the Apps-\>Reports (Beta) menu.
Reporting rate summaries will show how many datasets (forms) that have
been submitted by organisation unit and period.

The reporting rate is calculation is based on complete data set registrations. 
A complete data set registration refers to a user marking a data entry form as 
complete, typically by clicking the complete button in the data entry screen,
hereby indicating to the system that she considers the form to be
complete. This is i.e. a subjective approach to calculating
completeness.

El resumen de la tasa de informes mostrará para cada fila un rango de medida:

  - Actual reports: Indicates the number of data entry complete
    registrations for the relevant data set.

  - Expected reports: Indicates how many data entry complete
    registrations are expected. This number is based on the number of
    organisation units the relevant data set has been assigned to
    (enabled for data entry).

  - Reporting rate: The percentage of reports registered as complete based on
    the number expected.

  - Reports on time: Same as actual reports, only reports registered as
    complete within the maximum number of days after the end of the
    reporting period. This number of days after reporting period can be
    defined per data set in the data set management.

  - Reporting rate on time: Same as percentage, only reports registered as
    complete on time used as numerator.

Para ejecutar el informe, puede seguir estos pasos:

  - Seleccionar una unidad organizativa del árbol.

  - Seleccionar un set de datos.

  - Select a period type and a period from the list of available periods
    for that period type.

  - The report will then be rendered. Change any of the parameters above
    and click "Get report" again see the corresponding results.


![](resources/images/dhis2UserManual/react_reports_app_reporting_rate_summary.png)

## Using resources { #resources_in_the_beta_reports_app } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:resources_in_the_beta_reports_app-->

The resource tool allows you to upload both files from your local
computer to the DHIS server and to add links to other resources on the
Internet through URLs. If cloud storage is configured for your system,
resources will be saved there.

Para crear un nuevo recurso:

1.  Open the **Reports (Beta)** app and click **Resource**.

2.  Click en **Agregar nuevo**.

3.  Introducir un **Nombre**.

4.  Seleccionar un **Tipo**: **Cargar archivo** o **URL externa**.

5.  Click en **Guardar**.

## Using organisation unit distribution reports { #orgunit_distribution_reports_in_the_beta_reports_app } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:orgunit_distribution_reports_in_the_beta_reports_app-->

You can access the Orgunit Distribution reports from the left side menu
in the Apps-\>Reports (Beta).

Orgunit distribution reports are reports that show how the orgunits are
distributed on various properties like type and ownership, and by
geographical areas.

El resultado se puede presentar en un informe basado en tablas o en un gráfico.

**Ejecutar un informe:**

To run a report first select an orgunit in the upper left side orgunit
tree. The report will be based on orgunits located under the selected
orgunit. The select the orgunit group set that you want to use,
typically these are Type, Ownership, Rural/Urban, but can be any
user-defined orgunit group set. The you can click on either Get Report
to get the table-based presentation or Get chart to get the same result
in a chart. You can also download the table-based report as Excel or
CSV.


![](resources/images/dhis2UserManual/react_reports_app_org_unit_dist.png)


# Using the Data Visualizer app { #data_visualizer } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:data_visualizer-->

## Creating and editing visualizations { #creating-and-editing-visualizations } 

Cuando abre la aplicación visualizador de datos desde el menú dhis2, se le presenta una pizarra en blanco y puede comenzar a crear su visualización de inmediato.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-new.png)

Select the desired visualization type from the selector in the upper left corner:

![](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-visualization-type.png)

From the dimension menu on the left you can select the dimension you want
to show in your visualization, including data, period, organisation units and
dynamic dimensions.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-dimensions.png)

You can also change the selections by clicking on the
chips in the layout area.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-layout-area.png)

## Adding more axes { #adding-more-axes } 

When combining data with different measurement scales you will get a more meaningful visualization by having more than a single axis. For "column", "bar" and "line" charts you can do so by clicking "Manage axes" in the series dimension's context menu.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-axis-management-menu-option.png)

In the axis management dialog you can assign data items to the two axes.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-axis-management-dialog.png)

## Viewing visualization interpretations { #viewing-visualization-interpretations } 

When viewing a visualization, you can expand the interpretations on the right
side by clicking on the Interpretations button in the upper right corner.
The visualization description will also be shown. The description suppots rich text format.

To view the visualization according to the date of a particular interpretation,
click on the interpretation or its "View" button. This will regenerate the visualization with the
relevant date, which is indicated next to the visualization title.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-view-interpretation.png)

Clicking on "Back to all interpretations" or the "Exit View" button inside the interpretations panel will clear the
interpretation and regenerate the visualization with the current date.

## See visualization as map { #see-visualization-as-map } 

Sometimes it can be useful to see how visualization would look like on map. To achieve this you can select "Open as Map" visualization type after you build your visualization.

![](resources/images/data-visualizer/data-visualizer-open-as-map.png)


# Analyze data in pivot tables { #pivot } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:pivot-->

## About the Pivot Table app { #pivot_about } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:pivot_about-->

With the **Pivot Table** app, you can create pivot tables based on all
available data dimensions in DHIS2. A pivot table is a dynamic tool for
data analysis which lets you summarize and arrange data according to its
dimensions. Examples of data dimensions in DHIS2 are:

  - data dimension itself (for example data elements, indicators and
    events)

  - periods (representing the time period for the data)

  - organisation hierarchy (representing the geographical location of
    the data)

From these dimensions you can freely select *dimension items* to include
in the pivot table. You can create additional dimensions in DHIS2 with
the group set functionality. This allows for different aggregation
pathways, such as aggregation by "Partner" or facility type.

A pivot table can arrange data dimensions on *columns*, *rows*, and as
*filters*. When you place a data dimension on columns, the pivot table
will display one column per dimension item. If you place multiple data
dimensions on columns, the pivot table displays one column for all
combinations of the items in the selected dimensions. When you place a
data dimension on rows, the pivot table displays one row per dimension
item in a similar fashion. The dimensions you select as filters will not
be included in the pivot table, but will aggregate and filter the table
data based on the selected filter items.

> **Tip**
>
>   - You must select at least one dimension on columns or rows.
>
>   - You must include at least one period.
>
>   - Data element group sets and reporting rates can't appear in the
>     same pivot table.
>
>   - A pivot table can't contain more than the maximum number of
>     analytic records which have been specified in the system settings.
>     The maximum number of records could also be constrained by the
>     maximum RAM which is available to your browser. You will be
>     prompted with a warning if your requested table exceeds a
>     particular size. From this prompt, you can either cancel the
>     request or continue building the table. Consider making smaller
>     tables instead of one table which displays all of your data
>     elements and indicators together.
>
>   - The **Pivot Table** app supports drill-down and up for periods and
>     organisation unit. This means that you can for example drill down
>     from yearly periods to quarters, months and weeks inside a pivot
>     table. You can also drill down from the global organisation unit
>     to countries, provinces and facilities.

## Create a pivot table { #pivot_create } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:pivot_create-->

1.  Open the **Pivot Table** app.

2.  In the menu to the left, select the dimension items you want to
    analyse, for example data elements or indicators.

3.  Click **Layout** and arrange the data dimensions as columns, rows
    and filters.

    You can keep the default selection if you want.

4.  Click **Actualizar**.

In this example, indicators are listed as columns and periods as rows.

![](resources/images/pivot_table/basic_pivot.png)

### Select dimension items { #select-dimension-items } 

The left menu lists sections for all available data dimensions. From
each section you can select any number of dimension items. As an
example, you can open the section for data elements and select any
number of data elements from the available list. You can select an item
by marking it and clicking on the arrow in the section header or simply
double-clicking on the item. Before you can use a data dimension in your
pivot table you must at least select one dimension item. If you arrange
a dimension as columns or rows but do not select any dimension items,
the dimension is ignored.

You must choose at least one data dimension type to create a pivot
table. The available types are described in this table:

<table>
<caption>Data dimension types</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Data dimension type</th>
<th>Definition</th>
<th>Examples</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Indicators</td>
<td>An indicator is a calculated formula based on data elements.</td>
<td>Coverage of immunization across a specific district.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Data elements</td>
<td>Represents the phenomenon for which data has been captured.</td>
<td>Number of malaria cases; number of BCG doses given.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Data sets</td>
<td>A collection of data elements grouped for data collection. You can select :
<ul>
<li><p><strong>Reporting rates</strong>: the percentage of actual reports compared to the expected number of reports</p></li>
<li><p><strong>Reporting rates on time</strong>: the reporting rates based on timely form submissions. A timely submission must happen within a number of days after the reporting period.</p></li>
<li><p><strong>Actual reports</strong>: the actual number of reports</p></li>
<li><p><strong>Actual reports on time</strong>: the actual number of reports based on timely form submissions. A timely submission must happen within a number of days after the reporting period.</p></li>
<li><p><strong>Expected reports</strong>: the number of expected reports based on organisation units where the data set and the reporting frequency has been assigned.</p></li>
</ul></td>
<td>Reporting rates for immunization and morbidity forms.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Event data items</td>
<td>A data element that is part of a program representing events that have been captured.</td>
<td>Average weight and height for children in a nutrition program.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Program indicators</td>
<td>A calculated formula based on data elements in a program representing events.</td>
<td>Average BMI score for children in a nutrition program.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

You can combine these dimensions to display for example aggregate data
with reporting rates, or event data items together with program
indicators, all in the same pivot tables. For the "data element" data
dimension, you are also able to select "Totals" and "Details", which
will allow you to view different category combination options together
on the same pivot table.

For the period dimension you can choose between using fixed periods or
relative periods. An example of a fixed period is "January 2012". To
select fixed periods start by selecting a period type from the period
type list. You can then select periods from the list of available
periods.

Relative periods are periods relative to the current date. Examples of
relative periods are "Last month", "Last 12 months", "Last 5 years".
Relative periods can be selected by ticking the check-boxes next to each
period. The main advantage of using relative periods is that when you
save a pivot table favorite, it will stay updated with the latest data
as time goes by without the need for constantly updating it.

For the organisation unit dimension you can select any number of
organisation units from the hierarchy. To select all organisation units
below a specific parent organisation unit, right click and click "Select
all children". To manually select multiple organisation units, click and
hold the **Ctrl** key while clicking on organisation units. You can tick
"User org unit", "User sub-units" or "User sub-x2-units" in order to
dynamically insert the organisation unit or units associated with your
user account. This is useful when you save a pivot table favorite and
want to share it with other users, as the organisation units linked with
the other user's account will be used when viewing the favorite.


![](resources/images/pivot_table/period_dimension.png)

Dynamic dimensions can consist of organisation unit group sets, data
element group sets, or category option group sets which have been
configured with the type of "Disaggregation". Once the group sets have
been configured, they will be come available in the pivot tables, and
can be used as additional analysis dimensions, for instance to analyse
aggregate data by Type of organisation unit or Implementing partner.
Dynamic dimensions work the same as fixed dimensions.

> **Tip**
>
> Some dynamic dimensions may contain many items. This can cause issues
> with certain browsers due to the length of the URL when many dimension
> members are selected. A special "All" check box is available for
> dynamic dimensions, which allows you to include all available
> dimensions implicitly in your pivot table, without specifying each and
> every dimension member.

### Modify pivot table layout { #modify-pivot-table-layout } 

After selecting data dimensions it is time to arrange your pivot table.
Click "Layout" in the top menu to open the layout screen. In this screen
you can position your data dimensions as table columns, rows or filters
by clicking and dragging the dimensions from the dimensions list to the
respective column, row and filter lists. You can set any number of
dimensions in any of the lists. For instance, you can click on
"Organisation units" and drag it to the row list in order to position
the organisation unit dimension as table rows. Note that indicators,
data elements and data set reporting rates are part of the common "Data"
dimension and will be displayed together in the pivot table. For
instance, after selecting indicators and data elements in the left menu,
you can drag "Organisation Unit" from the available dimensions list to
the row dimension list in order to arrange them as rows in the pivot
table.


![](resources/images/pivot_table/table_layout.png)

After you have set up your pivot table you can click "Update" to render
your pivot table, or click "Hide" to hide the layout screen without any
changes taking effect. Since we in our example have selected both the
period and organisation unit dimension as rows, the pivot table will
generate all combinations of the items in these dimensions and produce a
table like this:

![](resources/images/pivot_table/pivot_rows.png)

## Change the display of your pivot table { #pivot_change_display } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:pivot_change_display-->

1.  Open the **Pivot Table** app.

2.  Create a new pivot table or open a favorite.

3.  Click **Options**.

4.  Set the options as required.

    <table>
    <caption>Pivot table options</caption>
    <colgroup>
    <col style="width: 21%" />
    <col style="width: 35%" />
    <col style="width: 42%" />
    </colgroup>
    <thead>
    <tr class="header">
    <th><p>Option</p></th>
    <th><p>Description</p></th>
    </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p><strong>Data</strong></p></td>
    <td><p><strong>Show column totals</strong></p>
    <p><strong>Show row totals</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Displays total values in the table for each row and column, as well as a total for all values in the table.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Show column sub-totals</strong></p>
    <p><strong>Show row sub-totals</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Displays subtotals in the table for each dimension.</p>
    <p>If you only select one dimension, subtotals will be hidden for those columns or rows. This is because the values will be equal to the subtotals.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Show dimension labels</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Shows the dimension names as part of the pivot tables.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Hide empty rows</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Hides empty rows from the table. This is useful when you look at large tables where a big part of the dimension items don't have data in order to keep the table more readable.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Hide empty columns</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Hides empty columns from the table. This is useful when you look at large tables where a big part of the dimension items don't have data in order to keep the table more readable.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Skip rounding</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Skips the rounding of data values, offering the full precision of data values. Can be useful for finance data where the full dollar amount is required.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Aggregation type</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>The default aggregation operator can be over-ridden here, by selecting a different aggregation operator. Some of the aggregation types are <strong>Count</strong>, <strong>Min</strong> and <strong>Max</strong>.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Number type</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Sets the type of value you want to display in the pivot table: <strong>Value</strong>, <strong>Percentage of row</strong> or <strong>Percentage of column</strong>.</p>
    <p>The options <strong>Percentage of row</strong> and<strong>Percentage of column</strong> mean that you'll display values as percentages of row total or percentage of column total instead of the aggregated value. This is useful when you want to see the contribution of data elements, categories or organisation units to the total value.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Measure criteria</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Allows for the data to be filtered on the server side.</p>
    <p>You can instruct the system to return only records where the aggregated data value is equal, greater than, greater or equal, less than or less or equal to certain values.</p>
    <p>If both parts of the filter are used, it's possible to filter out a range of data records.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p><strong>Events</strong></p></td>
    <td><p><strong>Include only completed events</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Includes only completed events in the aggregation process. This is useful for example to exclude partial events in indicator calculations.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p><strong>Organisation units</strong></p></td>
    <td><p><strong>Show hierarchy</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Shows the name of all ancestors for organisation units, for example &quot;Sierra Leone / Bombali / Tamabaka / Sanya CHP&quot; for Sanya CHP.</p>
    <p>The organisation units are then sorted alphabetically which will order the organisation units according to the hierarchy.</p>
    <p>When you download a pivot table with organisation units as rows and you've selected <strong>Show hierarchy</strong>, each organisation unit level is rendered as a separate column. This is useful for example when you create Excel pivot tables on a local computer.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p><strong>Legend</strong></p></td>
    <td><p><strong>Apply legend</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Applies a legend to the values. This mean that you can apply a colour to the values.</p>
    <p>Select <strong>By data item</strong> to color the table cells individually according to each data element or indicator.</p>
    <p>You configure legends in the <strong>Maintenance</strong> app.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Style</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Colors the text or background of cells in pivot tables based on the selected legend.</p>
    <p>You can use this option for scorecards to identify high and low values at a glance.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p><strong>Style</strong></p></td>
    <td><p><strong>Display density</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Controls the size of the cells in the table. You can set it to <strong>Comfortable</strong>, <strong>Normal</strong> or <strong>Compact</strong>.</p>
    <p><strong>Compact</strong> is useful when you want to fit large tables into the browser screen.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Font size</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Controls the size of the table text font. You can set it to <strong>Large</strong>, <strong>Normal</strong> or <strong>Small</strong>.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Digit group separator</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Controls which character to separate groups of digits or &quot;thousands&quot;. You can set it to <strong>Comma</strong>, <strong>Space</strong> or <strong>None</strong>.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p><strong>General</strong></p></td>
    <td><p><strong>Table title</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Type a title here to display it above the table.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p><strong>Parameters (for standard reports only)</strong></p></td>
    <td><blockquote>
    <p><strong>Note</strong></p>
    <p>You create standard reports in the <strong>Reports</strong> app.</p>
    <p>In the <strong>Pivot Table</strong> app you set which parameters the system should prompt the user for.</p>
    </blockquote></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Reporting period</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Controls whether to ask user to enter a report period.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Organisation unit</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Controls whether to ask user to enter an organisation unit.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Parent organisation unit</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Controls whether to ask user to enter a parent organisation unit.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Include regression</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Includes a column with regression values to the pivot table.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Include cumulative</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Includes a column with cumulative values to the pivot table.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Sort order</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Controls the sort order of the values.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Top limit</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Controls the maximum number of rows to include in the pivot table.</p></td>
    </tr>
    </tbody>
    </table>

5.  Click **Actualizar**.

## Manage favorites { #manage-favorites } 

Saving your charts or pivot tables as favorites makes it easy to find
them later. You can also choose to share them with other users as an
interpretation or display them on the dashboard.

You view the details and interpretations of your favorites in the
**Pivot Table**, **Data Visualizer**, **Event Visualizer**, **Event
Reports** apps. Use the **Favorites** menu to manage your favorites.

### Open a favorite { #open-a-favorite } 

1.  Click **Favorites** \> **Open**.

2.  Enter the name of a favorite in the search field, or click **Prev**
    and **Next** to display favorites.

3.  Click the name of the favorite you want to open.

### Save a favorite { #save-a-favorite } 

1.  Click **Favorites** \> **Save as**.

2.  Enter a **Name** and a **Description** for your favorite. The description field supports a rich text format, see the interpretations section for more details.

3.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Rename a favorite { #rename-a-favorite } 

1.  Click **Favorites** \> **Rename**.

2.  Enter the new name for your favorite.

3.  Click **Actualizar**.

### Write an interpretation for a favorite { #write-an-interpretation-for-a-favorite } 

An interpretation is a link to a resource with a description of the data
at a given period. This information is visible in the **Dashboard** app.
To create an interpretation, you first need to create a favorite. If
you've shared your favorite with other people, the interpretation you
write is visible to those people.

1.  Click **Favorites** \> **Write interpretation**.

2.  In the text field, type a comment, question or interpretation. You
    can also mention other users with '@username'. Start by typing '@'
    plus the first letters of the username or real name and a mentioning
    bar will display the available users. Mentioned users will receive
    an internal DHIS2 message with the interpretation or comment. You
    can see the interpretation in the **Dashboard** app.

    It is possible to format the text with **bold**, *italic* by using the
    Markdown style markers \* and \_ for **bold** and *italic* respectively.
    Keyboard shortcuts are also available: Ctrl/Cmd + B and Ctrl/Cmd + I. A
    limited set of smilies is supported and can be used by typing one of the
    following character combinations: :) :-) :( :-( :+1 :-1. URLs are
    automatically detected and converted into a clickable link.

3.  Search for a user group that you want to share your favorite with,
    then click the **+** icon.

4.  Change sharing settings for the user groups you want to modify.

      - **Can edit and view**: Everyone can view and edit the object.

      - **Can view only**: Everyone can view the object.

      - **None**: The public won't have access to the object. This
        setting is only applicable to **Public access**.

5.  Click **Share**.

### Subscribe to a favorite { #subscribe-to-a-favorite } 

When you are subscribed to a favorite, you receive internal messages
whenever another user likes/creates/updates an interpretation or
creates/update an interpretation comment of this favorite.

1.  Open a favorite.

2.  Click **\>\>\>** in the top right of the workspace.

3.  Click on the upper-right bell icon to subscribe to this favorite.

### Create a link to a favorite { #create-a-link-to-a-favorite } 

1.  Click **Favorites** \> **Get link**.

2.  Select one of the following:

      - **Open in this app**: You get a URL for the favorite which you
        can share with other users by email or chat.

      - **Open in web api**: You get a URL of the API resource. By
        default this is an HTML resource, but you can change the file
        extension to ".json" or ".csv".

### Delete a favorite { #delete-a-favorite } 

1.  Click **Favorites** \> **Delete**.

2.  Click **OK**.

### View interpretations based on relative periods { #view-interpretations-based-on-relative-periods } 

To view interpretations for relative periods, such as a year ago:

1.  Open a favorite with interpretations.

2.  Click **\>\>\>** in the top right of the workspace.

3.  Click an interpretation. Your chart displays the data and the date
    based on when the interpretation was created.To view other
    interpretations, click them.

## Download data from a pivot table { #pivot_download_data } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:pivot_download_data-->

### Download table layout data format { #download-table-layout-data-format } 

To download the data in the current pivot table:

1.  Click **Download**.

2.  Under **Table layout**, click the format you want to download:
    Microsoft Excel, CSV or HTML.

    The data table will have one column per dimension and contain names
    of the dimension items.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > When you download a pivot table with organisation units as rows
    > and you've selected **Show hierarchy** in **Table options**, each
    > organisation unit level is rendered as a separate column. This is
    > useful for example when you create Excel pivot tables on a local
    > computer.

> **Tip**
>
> You can create a pivot table in Microsoft Excel from the downloaded
> Excel file.

### Download plain data source format { #download-plain-data-source-format } 

You can download data in the current pivot table in JSON, XML, Excel,
and CSV as plain data formats with different identification schemes (ID,
Code, and Name). The data document uses identifiers of the dimension
items and opens in a new browser window to display the URL of the
request to the Web API in the address bar. This is useful for developers
of apps and other client modules based on the DHIS2 Web API or for those
who require a plan data source, for instance for import into statistical
packages.

To download plain data source formats:

1.  Click **Download**.

2.  Under **Plain data source**, click the format you want to download.

    <table>
    <caption>Available formats</caption>
    <colgroup>
    <col style="width: 18%" />
    <col style="width: 33%" />
    <col style="width: 47%" />
    </colgroup>
    <thead>
    <tr class="header">
    <th><p>Format</p></th>
    <th><p>Action</p></th>
    <th><p>Description</p></th>
    </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>JSON</p></td>
    <td><p>Click <strong>JSON</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Downloads JSON format based on ID property.</p>
    <p>You can also download JSON format based on <strong>Code</strong> or <strong>Name</strong> property.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p>XML</p></td>
    <td><p>Click <strong>XML</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Downloads XML format based on ID property.</p>
    <p>You can also download XML format based on <strong>Code</strong> or <strong>Name</strong> property.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>Microsoft Excel</p></td>
    <td><p>Click <strong>Microsoft Excel</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Downloads XML format based on ID property.</p>
    <p>You can also download Microsoft Excel format based on <strong>Code</strong> or <strong>Name</strong> property.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p>CSV</p></td>
    <td>Click <strong>CSV</strong></td>
    <td><p>Downloads CSV format based on ID property.</p>
    <p>You can also download CSV format based on <strong>Code</strong> or <strong>Name</strong> property.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>JRXML</p></td>
    <td><p>Put the cursor on <strong>Advanced</strong> and click <strong>JRXML</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Produces a template of a Jasper Report which can be further customized based on your exact needs and used as the basis for a standard report in DHIS2.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p>Raw data SQL</p></td>
    <td><p>Put the cursor on <strong>Advanced</strong> and click <strong>Raw data SQL</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Provides the actual SQL statement used to generate the pivot table. You can use it as a data source in a Jasper report, or as the basis for an SQL view.</p></td>
    </tr>
    </tbody>
    </table>

### Download a CSV format without rendering data in the web browser { #download-a-csv-format-without-rendering-data-in-the-web-browser } 

You can download data in CSV format directly without rendering the data
in the web browser. This helps to reduce any constraints in the system
settings that has been set with regards to the maximum number of
analytic records. This lets you download much larger batches of data
that you can use for later offline analysis.

To download data in CSV format without first rendering data in the web
browser:

1.  Click the arrow beside **Update**.

    ![](resources/images/pivot_table/data_dump.png)

2.  Click **CSV** to download the format based on ID property.

    The file downloads to your computer.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > You can also download CSV format based on **Code** or **Name**
    > property.

## Embed a pivot table in an external web page { #pivot_embed } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:pivot_embed-->

Certain analysis-related resources in DHIS2, like pivot tables, charts
and maps, can be embedded in any web page by using a plug-in. You will
find more information about the plug-ins in the Web API chapter in the
*DHIS2 Developer Manual*.

To generate a HTML fragment that you can use to display the pivot table
in an external web page:

1.  Click **Embed**.

2.  Click **Select** to highlight the HTML fragment.

## Visualize pivot table data as a chart or a map { #pivot_integration } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:pivot_integration-->

When you have made a pivot table you can switch between pivot table,
chart and map visualization of your data.

### Open a pivot table as a chart { #open-a-pivot-table-as-a-chart } 

1.  Click **Chart** \> **Open this table as chart**.

    Your current pivot table opens as a chart.


![](resources/images/pivot_table/pivot_integration.png)

### Open a pivot table selection as a chart { #open-a-pivot-table-selection-as-a-chart } 

If you want to visualize a small part of your pivot table as a chart you
can click directly on a value in the table instead opening the whole
table.

1.  In the pivot table, click a value.


    ![](resources/images/pivot_table/pivot_integration_table.png)

2.  To verify the selection, hold the cursor over **Open selection as
    chart**. The highlighted dimension headers in the table indicate
    what data will be visualized as a chart.

3.  Click **Open selection as chart**.

### Open a pivot table as a map { #open-a-pivot-table-as-a-map } 

1.  Click **Chart** \> **Open this table as map**

    Your current pivot table opens as a map.

### Open a pivot table selection as a map { #open-a-pivot-table-selection-as-a-map } 

1.  In the pivot table, click a value.

    A menu displays.

2.  Click **Open selection as map**.

    Your selection opens as a map.


# Using the Maps app { #using_maps } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:using_maps-->

## About the Maps app { #about_maps } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:about_maps-->

The Maps App is introduced in release 2.29 and serves as a replacement
of the GIS App offering a more intuitive and user-friendly interface.

With the Maps app you can overlay multiple layers and choose among
different base maps. You can create thematic maps of areas and points,
view facilities based on classifications, and visualize catchment areas
for each facility. You can add labels to areas and points, and search
and filter using various criteria. You can move points and set locations
on the fly. Maps can be saved as favorites and shared with other users
and groups, or downloaded as an image.

> **Note**
>
> To use predefined legends in the **Maps** app, you need to create them
> first in the **Maintenance** app.

![](resources/images/maps/maps_main.png)

  - The **layer panel** on the left side of the workspace shows an
    overview of the layers for the current map:

      - As layers are added, using the **(+) Add layer** button, they
        are arranged and managed in this panel.

      - The **basemap** is always shown in the panel. The default
        basemap is OSM Light and is selected by default. OpenStreetMap
        Detailed, Google Streets and Google Hybrid are also available.
        You can use these maps as background maps and layers. Switch
        between them by selecting the desired image.

      - The small arrow button to the right of the layer panel, at the
        top, allows the panel to be hidden or shown.

<!-- end list -->

  - The **File** button near the top left allows you to open and save
    maps:

      - New  

        will clear any existing map layers to create a new map.

      - Open  

        will display a dialog box with a list of existing maps where
        they be opened, renamed, shared and deleted. *The title of the
        current map is displayed in the header bar above the File
        button.*

      - Save  

        will save any changes to the current map.

      - Save as  

        will save the current map with a new name.

      - Rename  

        allows you to change the name and/or description of the current
        map.

      - Translate  

        allows you to translate the name and/or description of the
        current map.

      - Share  

        will open a dialog where the current map can be shared with
        everyone or a group of users.

      - Get link  

        will provide a direct link to the current map.

      - Delete  

        deletes the current map.

<!-- end list -->

  - The **Download** button next to the File button allows you to download the current map as a PNG image.

<!-- end list -->

  - The **Interpretations** button at top right opens an interpretations
    panel on the right side of the workspace. The button is only
    clickable if the map is saved.

      - **Map details** shows information about the current map.

      - **Interpretations** allows you to view, add, edit and share
        interpretations about the current map.

<!-- end list -->

  - The **+** and **-**buttons on the map allow you to zoom in and out
    of the map respectively. The mouse scroll wheel can also be used for
    altering the zoom.

  - **Zoom to content** (bounded magnifying glass symbol) automatically
    adjusts the zoom level and map center position to put the data on
    your map in focus.

  - **Search** (magnifying glass symbol) allows searching for and
    jumping to a location on the map.

  - The **ruler** button allows you to find the distance between two
    locations on the map.

  - To view information for an event, simply click the event.

  - Right-click on the map to display the longitude and latitude of that
    location.

**Basemaps**

Basemap layers are represented by layer *cards* in the layer panel such
as:


![](resources/images/maps/maps_basemap_card.png)

Along the top of the basemap card from left to right are:

  - The title of the selected basemap

  - An arrow symbol to collapse and expand the basemap card

In the middle of the basemap card is the list of available basemaps. The
current basemap is highlighted.

Along the bottom of the basemap card is:

  - An eye symbol for toggling the visibility of the layer

  - A slider for modifying the layer transparency

## Create a new map { #using_maps_create_map } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:using_maps_create_map-->

1.  In the **Apps** menu, click **Maps**. The **DHIS2 Maps** window
    opens.

2.  Click the (+) Add layer button in the top left. You are presented
    with the layer selection dialog:

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_layer_selection.png)

3.  Select a layer to add to the current map. Possible options are:

      - [Thematic](#using_maps_thematic_layer)

      - [Eventos](#using_maps_event_layer)

      - [Tracked entities](#using_maps_tracked_entity_layer)

      - [Facilities](#using_maps_facility_layer)

      - [Boundaries](#using_maps_boundary_layer)

    In addition, there are several layers provided by Google Earth
    Engine and other services:

      - Population density

      - Elevation

      - Temperature

      - Precipitation

      - Landcover

      - Nighttime lights

    *Labels overlay* is an [external
    layer](#using_maps_external_map_layers) defined in the Maintenance app.


## Manage thematic layers { #using_maps_thematic_layer } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:using_maps_thematic_layer-->

*Thematic maps* represent spatial variation of geographic distributions.
Select your desired combination of indicator/data element, period and
organisation unit level. If your database has coordinates and aggregated
data values for these organisation units, they will appear on the map.

> **Note**
>
> You must generate the DHIS2 analytics tables to have aggregated data
> values available.


![](resources/images/maps/maps_thematic_mapping.png)

Thematic layers are represented by layer *cards* in the layer panel such
as:

Along the top of the thematic card from left to right are:

  - A grab field to allow dragging and re-ordering layers with the mouse

  - The title and period associated with the layer

  - An arrow symbol to collapse and expand the thematic card

In the middle of the thematic card is a legend indicating the value
ranges displayed on the layer.

Along the bottom of the thematic card from left to right are:

  - An edit (pencil) button to open the layer configuration dialog

  - An eye symbol for toggling the visibility of the layer

  - A slider for modifying the layer transparency

  - A more actions (three dots) button with additional options:

      - A **data table** toggle button to show or hide the data table
        associated with the layer

      - **Download data** allows you to download the data for this layer in GeoJSON format for use in other mapping software

      - **Edit layer** is the same as edit button above

      - **Remove layer** will remove this layer from the current map.


### Create a thematic layer { #create-a-thematic-layer } 

To create an event layer, choose **Thematic** on the **Add
layer** selection. This opens the Events layer configuration dialog.

1.  In the **DATA** tab:

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_thematic_layer_dialog_DATA.png)

      - Select a data type and then select respectively the group and
        the target element. The available fields depend on the type of
        item selected.

      - Select a value from the **Aggregation type** field for the data
        values to be shown on the map. By default, "By data element" is
        selected. Alternative values are: Count; Average; Sum; Standard
        deviation; Variance; Min; Max. See also [Aggregation
        operators](https://dhis2.github.io/dhis2-docs/master/en/user/html/ch10s05.html#d0e8082).

2.  In the **PERIOD** tab

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_thematic_layer_dialog_PERIOD.png)

      - select the time span over which the thematic data is mapped.
        You can select either a relative or a fixed period.

          - Relative period  

            In the **Period type** field select **Relative**, then
            select one of the relative periods, for example **Last year** or 
            **Last 12 months**, in the **Period** field. If you select a
            relative period covering multiple years/months/weeks/days 
            the layer can be displayed as

              - Single (aggregate)

                Show aggregate values for the relative period selected (default).

              - Timeline

                Includes a timeline allowing you to step through the periods.
                Only one timeline layer can be added to the same map. 

              - Split map views

                Show multiple maps allowing you to compare different periods
                side by side. Supported for relative periods with 12 items
                or below. Can not be combined with other layer types.  

          - Fixed period  

            In the **Period type** field select period length, then
            select the target in the **Period** field.

          - Start/end dates  

            In the **Period type** field select **Start/end dates**
            and fill in a start date and an end date.       

3.  In the **ORG UNITS** tab:

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_thematic_layer_dialog_ORG_UNITS.png)

      - Select the organisation units you want to include in the layer.
        It is possible to select either

          - One or more specific organisation units, organisation unit levels in
            the hierarchy, organisation unit groups, or

          - A relative level in the organisation unit hierarchy, with
            respect to the user. By selecting a **User organisation
            unit** the map data will appear differently for users at
            different levels in the organisation unit hierarchy.

4.  In the **FILTER** tab:

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_thematic_layer_dialog_FILTER.png)

      - Click ADD FILTER and select an available data item to add a new
        filter to the data set.

          - Select a data dimension from the drop down box. You can
            reduce the number of dimensions shown by using the search field.
            Click on the name to select a dimension.

          - When a dimension is selected you get a second drop down with
            dimension items. Check the items you want to include in the
            filter.

        Multiple filters may be added. Click the trash button on the right of
        the filter to remove it.

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:using_maps_thematic_layer_style-->

5.  In the **STYLE** tab:

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_thematic_layer_dialog_STYLE.png)

      - Select either **Automatic** or **Predefined** legend.

          - Automatic legend types means that the application will
            create a legend set for you based on your what method,
            number of classes, low color and high color you select.
            Method alludes to the size of the legend classes. Set to

              - Equal intervals  

                the range of each interval will be **(highest data value - lowest data value / number of classes)**

              - Equal counts  

                the legend creator will try to distribute the organisation units evenly.

          - If you have facilities in your thematic layer, you can set
            the radius for minimum and maximum values by changing the
            values in the **Low size** and **High size** boxes
            respectively.

6.  Click **ADD LAYER**.

### Modify a thematic layer { #modify-a-thematic-layer } 

1.  In the layer panel, click the edit (pencil) icon on the thematic
    layer card.

2.  Modify the setting on any of the tabs as desired.

3.  Click **UPDATE LAYER**.

### Filter values in a thematic layer { #filter-values-in-a-thematic-layer } 

Thematic layers have a **data table** option that can be toggled on or
off from the thematic layer card.

![](resources/images/maps/maps_thematic_layer_data_table.png)

The data table displays the data forming the thematic layer.

  - clicking on a title will sort the table based on that column;
    toggling between ascending and descending.

  - entering text or expressions into the filter fields below the titles
    will apply those filters to the data, and the display will adjust
    according to the filter. The filters are applied as follows:

      - NAME  

        filter by name containing the given text

      - VALUE  

        filter values by given numbers and/or ranges, for example:
        2,\>3&\<8

      - LEGEND  

        filter by legend containing the given text

      - RANGE  

        filter by ranges containing the given text

      - LEVEL  

        filter level by numbers and/or ranges, for example: 2,\>3&\<8

      - PARENT  

        filter by parent names containing the given text

      - ID  

        filter by IDs containing the given text

      - TYPE  

        filter by GIS display types containing the given text

      - COLOR  

        filter by color names containing the given text

> **Note**
>
> Data table filters are temporary and are not saved with the map layers
> as part of the favourite.

### Search for an organisation unit { #search-for-an-organisation-unit } 

The NAME filter field in the data table provides an effective way of
searching for individual organisation units.

### Navigate between organisation hierarchies { #navigate-between-organisation-hierarchies } 

When there are visible organisation units on the map, you can easily
navigate up and down in the hierarchy without using the level/parent
user interface.

1.  Right-click one of the organisation units.

2.  Select **Drill up one level** or **Drill down one level**.

    The drill down option is disabled if you are on the lowest level or
    if there are no coordinates available on the level below. Likewise
    the drill up option is disabled from the highest level.

### Remove thematic layer { #remove-thematic-layer } 

To clear all data in a thematic layer:

1.  In the layer card to the left, click the *more actions* (three dots) icon
    and then on **Remove layer**.

    The layer is removed from the current map.


## Manage event layers { #using_maps_event_layer } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:using_maps_event_layer-->

The event layer displays the geographical location of events registered
in the DHIS2 tracker. Provided that events have associated point or polygon
coordinates, you can use this layer to drill down from the aggregated
data displayed in the thematic layers to the underlying individual
events or cases.

You can also display aggregated events at the facility or at the
boundary level. You do this through a thematic layer using event data
items. This is useful when you only have the coordinates for the Org
Unit under which the events are recorded.

![](resources/images/maps/maps_event_layer.png)

Event layers are represented by layer *cards* in the layer panel such
as:

Along the top of the event card from left to right are:

  - A grab field to allow dragging and re-ordering layers with the mouse

  - The title and period associated with the layer

  - An arrow symbol to collapse and expand the event card

In the middle of the event card is a legend indicating the styling of
the layer.

Along the bottom of the event card from left to right are:

  - An edit (pencil) button to open the layer configuration dialog

  - An eye symbol for toggling the visibility of the layer

  - A slider for modifying the layer transparency

  - A more actions (three dots) button with additional options:

      - **Download data** allows you to download the data for this layer in GeoJSON format for use in other mapping software

      - **Edit layer** is the same as edit button above

      - **Remove layer** will remove this layer from the current map.

### Create an event layer { #maps_create_event_layer } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:maps_create_event_layer-->

To create an event layer, choose **Events** on the **Add
layer** selection. This opens the Events layer configuration dialog.

1.  In the **DATA** tab:

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_event_layer_dialog_DATA.png)

      - Select a program and then select a program stage. The **Stage**
        field is only shown once a program is selected.

        If there is only one stage available for the selected program,
        the stage is automatically selected.

      - Select a value from the **Coordinate field** for the positions
        shown on the map. By default, "Event location" is selected.
        Depending on the data elements or attributes that belong to a
        program, other coordinates such as "Household position" are
        available.

2.  In the **PERIOD** tab

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_event_layer_dialog_PERIOD.png)

      - select the time span for when the events took place. You can
        select either a fixed period or a relative period.

          - Fixed period  

            In the **Period** field, select **Start/end dates** and fill
            in a start date and an end date.

          - Relative period  

            In the **Period** field, select one of the relative periods,
            for example **This month** or **Last year**.

3.  In the **ORG UNITS** tab:

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_event_layer_dialog_ORG_UNITS.png)

      - Select the organisation units you want to include in the layer.
        It is possible to select either

          - One or more specific organisation units, or

          - A relative level in the organisation unit hierarchy, with
            respect to the user. By selecting a **User organisation
            unit** the map data will appear differently for users at
            different levels in the organisation unit hierarchy.

4.  In the **FILTER** tab:

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_event_layer_dialog_FILTER.png)

      - Click ADD FILTER and select an available data item to add a new
        filter to the data set.

          - For data item of type *option set*, you can select any of
            the options from the drop down box by using the down-wards
            arrow or by start typing directly in the box to filter for
            options.

          - For data item of type *number*, you can select operators like
            equal, not equal, greater than or less than.

          - For data item of type *boolean* (yes/no), you can check the box
            if the condition should be valid or true.

          - For data item of type *text* you will get two choices:
            **Contains** implies that the query will match all values
            which contains your search value, and **Is exact** implies
            that only values which is completely identical to your
            search query will be returned.

        Multiple filters may be added. Click the trash button on the right of
        the filter to remove it.

5.  In the **STYLE** tab:

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_event_layer_dialog_STYLE.png)

      - Select **Group events** to group nearby events (cluster), or
        **View all events** to display events individually.

      - Select a **color** for the event or cluster points.

      - Select the **radius** (between 1 and 20) for the events.

      - Select **Show buffer** to display visual buffer around each
        event. The radius of the buffer can be modified here. This
        option is only available if you select **View all events**
        above.

      - Select a **Style by data element** to colorise the events
        according to a data value. The options varies for different
        data types:

          - **Option sets**: Select a color for each option in an option
            set. You can set default colors for an option in the
            Maintenance app.

          - **Numbers**: You can style a numeric data element in [the same
            way as thematic layers](#using_maps_thematic_layer_style) using
            automatic or predefined legends.  

          - **Booleans**: Select a color for true/yes and another for
            false/no.        

6.  Click **ADD LAYER**.

### Modify an event layer { #modify-an-event-layer } 

1.  In the layer panel, click the edit (pencil) icon on the event layer
    card.

2.  Modify the setting on the DATA, PERIOD, FILTER, ORG UNIT and STYLE
    tabs as desired.

3.  Click **UPDATE LAYER**.

### Modify information in event pop-up windows { #modify-information-in-event-pop-up-windows } 

You can modify the information displayed in the event pop-up window.


![](resources/images/maps/maps_eventlayer_eventinfopopup.png)

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app.

2.  Select **Program**.

3.  Click the program you want to modify and select **2 Assign data elements**.

4.  For every data element you want to display in the pop-up window,
    select corresponding **Display in reports**.

5.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Download raw event layer data { #download-raw-event-layer-data } 

The raw data for event layers can be downloaded in GeoJSON format for more advanced geo-analytics and processing in desktop GIS software such as [QGIS](https://www.qgis.org/).  The downloaded data includes all individual events as GeoJSON features, including attributes for each data element selected for **Display in reports**.

![](resources/images/maps/maps_data_download_dialog.png)

- In the layer card to the left, click the *more actions* (three dots) icon and then on **Download data**

- Select the **ID format** to use as the key for Data Element values in the downloaded GeoJSON file.  There are three options available:

  - **ID** - Use the unique ID of the data element
  - **Name** - Use the human-friendly name of the data element (translated)
  - **Code** - Use the code of the data element

- Select whether or not to **Use human-readable keys** for other Event attributes, such as Program Stage, Latitude, Longitude, Event Data, and Organization Unit ID, Name, and Code.  When this option is **not** selected these values will be the computer-friendly ID instead of the human-readable (and translated) name.

- Click the **DOWNLOAD** button to generate and download a GeoJSON file.  The data will be requested from the DHIS2 server and processed by the maps application.  This operation may take several minutes to complete.

- Once the GeoJSON file has been downloaded it can be imported into most standard GIS software applications.

> Note that the downloaded data does not include style information as it is not natively supported by the GeoJSON format.  Styles can optionally be recreated in external GIS applications using the attributes of each feature.

### Clear event layer { #clear-event-layer } 

To clear all event layer data in a map:

1.  In the layer card to the left, click the *more actions* (three dots) icon
    and then on **Remove layer**.

    The layer is removed from the current map.

## Manage tracked entity layers { #using_maps_tracked_entity_layer } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:using_maps_tracked_entity_layer-->

The tracked entity layer displays the geographical location of tracked
entities registered in the DHIS2. Provided that tracked entities have
associated point or polygon coordinates, you can explore these on a map.

![](resources/images/maps/maps_tracked_entity_layer.png)

Tracked entity layers are represented by layer cards in the layer panel
such as:

Along the top of the tracked entity card from left to right are:

  - A grab field to allow dragging and re-ordering layers with the
    mouse.

  - The title and period associated with the layer.

  - An arrow symbol to collapse and expand the tracked entity card.

In the middle of the tracked entity card is a legend indicating the
styling of the layer.

Along the bottom of the tracked entity card from left to right are:

  - An edit (pencil) button to open the layer configuration dialog

  - An eye symbol for toggling the visibility of the layer

  - A slider for modifying the layer transparency

  - A more actions (three dots) button with additional options:

      - **Edit layer** is the same as edit button above

      - **Remove layer** will remove this layer from the current map.

### Create a tracked entity layer { #maps_create_tracked_enity_layer } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:maps_create_tracked_enity_layer-->

To create an tracked entity layer, choose **Tracked entities** on the
**Add layer** selection. This opens the Tracked entity layer
configuration dialog.

1.  In the **DATA** tab:

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_tracked_entity_layer_dialog_DATA.png)

      - Select the **Tracked Entity Type** you want to show on the map.

      - Select a **Program** where the tracked entities belong.

      - Set the **Program status** to be **Active** or **Completed**.

      - Set the **Follow up** status of the tracked entity for the given
        program.

2.  In the **Relationships** tab

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_tracked_entity_layer_dialog_RELATIONSHIPS.png)

    > **Caution**
    >
    > Displaying tracked entity relationships in Maps is an experimental feature

      - If a Tracked Entity Type with has been selected, you can select the **Display Tracked Entity relationships** checkbox

      - Once checked, you can select the type of relationship to display on the map from the dropdown list. Only relationships FROM the selected Tracked Entity type are available.

3.  In the **PERIOD** tab

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_tracked_entity_layer_dialog_PERIOD.png)

      - If no program is selected, you can set start and end dates when
        the tracked entities were last updated.

      - If a program is selected, you can set start and end dates for
        the program period.

4.  In the **ORG UNITS** tab:

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_tracked_entity_layer_dialog_ORG_UNITS.png)

      - Select the organisation units you want to include in the layer.
        You have 3 selection modes:

          - **Selected only**: Include tracked entities belonging to
            selected org units only.

          - **Selected and below**: Included tracked entities in and
            right below selected org units.

          - **Selected and all below**: Included tracked entities in and
            all below selected org units.

5.  In the **STYLE** tab:

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_tracked_entity_layer_dialog_STYLE.png)

      - Select a **color** for the tracked entities points and polygons.

      - Select the **point size** (radius between 1 and 20) for the
        points.

      - Select **Show buffer** to display visual buffer around each
        tracked entity. The buffer distance in meters can be modified
        here.

      - If a relationship type has been selected on the relationships tab you can select **color**, **point size**, and **line color** for relationships and related tracked entities instances

6.  Click **ADD/UPDATE LAYER**.

### Modify a tracked entity layer { #modify-a-tracked-entity-layer } 

1.  In the layer panel, click the edit (pencil) icon on the tracked
    entity layer card.

2.  Modify the setting on the DATA, PERIOD, ORG UNIT and STYLE tabs as
    desired.

3.  Click **UPDATE LAYER**.

### Clear a tracked entity layer { #clear-a-tracked-entity-layer } 

To clear a tracked entity layer from a map:

1.  In the layer card to the left, click the *more actions* (three dots) icon
    and then on **Remove layer**.

    The layer is removed from the current map.

## Manage facility layers { #using_maps_facility_layer } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:using_maps_facility_layer-->

The facility layer displays icons that represent types of facilities.
Polygons do not show up on the map, so make sure that you select an
organisation unit level that has facilities.

*A polygon is an enclosed area on a map representing a country, a
district or a park.*


![](resources/images/maps/maps_facility_layer.png)

Facility layers are represented by layer *cards* in the layer panel such
as:

Along the top of the facilities card from left to right are:

  - A grab field to allow dragging and re-ordering layers with the mouse

  - The **Facilities** title

  - An eye symbol for toggling the visibility of the layer

  - An arrow symbol to collapse and expand the facilities card

In the middle of the facilities card is a legend indicating the group
set representation.

Along the bottom of the facilities card from left to right are:

  - An edit (pencil) button to open the layer configuration dialog

  - A slider for modifying the layer transparency

  - A more actions (three dots) button with additional options:

      - A **data table** toggle button to show or hide the data table
        associated with the layer

      - **Download data** allows you to download the data for this layer in GeoJSON format for use in other mapping software

      - **Edit layer** is the same as edit button above

      - **Remove layer** will remove this layer from the current map.


### Create a facility layer { #create-a-facility-layer } 

To create facility layer, choose **Facilities** on the **Add
layer**selection. This opens the Facility layer configuration dialog.

1.  In the **GROUP SET** tab:

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_facility_layer_dialog_GROUPSET.png)

      - Select a **Group set** from the list of organisation unit group
        sets defined for your DHIS2 instance.

2.  In the **ORGANISATION UNITS** tab

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_facility_layer_dialog_ORG_UNITS.png)

      - select the organisation unit level(s) and/or group(s) from the
        selection fields on the right hand side.

      - Select the organisation units you want to include in the layer.
        It is possible to select either

          - One or more specific organisation units, or

          - A relative level in the organisation unit hierarchy, with
            respect to the user. By selecting a **User organisation
            unit** the map data will appear differently for users at
            different levels in the organisation unit hierarchy.

3.  In the **STYLE** tab:

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_facility_layer_dialog_STYLE.png)

      - select any styling you wish to apply to the facilities.

          - Show labels  

            Allows labels to be shown on the layer. Font size, weight
            and color can be modified here.

          - Show buffer  

            Allows a visual buffer to be displayed on the layer around
            each facility. The radius of the buffer can be modified
            here.

4.  Click **ADD LAYER**.

### Create or modify a facility layer { #create-or-modify-a-facility-layer } 

1.  In the layer panel, click the edit (pencil) icon on the facility
    layer card.

2.  Modify the setting on the GROUP SET, ORGANISATION UNITS and STYLE
    tabs as desired.

3.  Click **UPDATE LAYER**.

### Filter values in a facility layer { #filter-values-in-a-facility-layer } 

Facility layers have a **data table** option that can be toggled on or
off from the facility layer card.

![](resources/images/maps/maps_facility_layer_data_table.png)

The data table displays the data forming the facility layer.

  - clicking on a title will sort the table based on that column;
    toggling between ascending and descending.

  - entering text or expressions into the filter fields below the titles
    will apply those filters to the data, and the display will adjust
    according to the filter. The filters are applied as follows:

      - NAME  

        filter by name containing the given text

      - ID  

        filter by IDs containing the given text

      - TYPE  

        filter by GIS display types containing the given text

> **Note**
>
> Data table filters are temporary and are not saved with the map layers
> as part of the favourite.

### Search for a facility { #search-for-a-facility } 

The NAME filter field in the data table provides an effective way of
searching for individual facilities.

### Remove facility layer { #remove-facility-layer } 

To clear all data in a facility layer:

1.  In the layer card to the left, click the *more actions* (three dots) icon
    and then on **Remove layer**.

    The layer is removed from the current map.

### Manage facilities in a layer { #manage-facilities-in-a-layer } 

You can have facilities in **Facility**, **Boundary** and **Thematic**
layers.

#### Relocate a facility { #relocate-a-facility } 

1.  Right-click a facility and click **Relocate**.

2.  Put the cursor in the new location.

    The new coordinate is stored permanently. This cannot be undone.

#### Swap longitude and latitude of a facility { #swap-longitude-and-latitude-of-a-facility } 

1.  Right-click a facility and click **Swap longitude/latitude**.

    This is useful if a user inverted latitude and longitude coordinates
    when creating the organisation unit.

#### Display facility information { #display-facility-information } 

You can view organisation unit information set by the administrator as
follows:

<table>
<caption>View organisation unit information</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 40%" />
<col style="width: 59%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Function</th>
<th>Action</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>View information for the current period</p></td>
<td><ol type="1">
<li><p>Click a facility.</p></li>
</ol></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>View information for a selected period</p></td>
<td><ol type="1">
<li><p>Right-click a facility and click <strong>Show information</strong>.</p></li>
<li><p>In the <strong>Infrastructural data</strong> section, select a period.</p></li>
</ol>
<blockquote>
<p><strong>Note</strong></p>
<p>You configure the displayed infrastructural data in the <strong>System Settings</strong> app.</p>
</blockquote></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## Manage boundary layers { #using_maps_boundary_layer } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:using_maps_boundary_layer-->

The boundary layer displays the borders and locations of your
organisation units. This layer is particularly useful if you are offline
and don't have access to background maps.


![](resources/images/maps/maps_bound_layers.png)

Boundary layers are represented by layer *cards* in the layer panel such
as:

Along the top of the boundary card from left to right are:

  - A grab field to allow dragging and re-ordering layers with the mouse

  - The **Boundaries** title

  - An arrow symbol to collapse and expand the boundary card

Along the bottom of the boundary card from left to right are:

  - An edit (pencil) button to open the layer configuration dialog

  - An eye symbol for toggling the visibility of the layer

  - A slider for modifying the layer transparency

  - A more actions (three dots) button with additional options:

      - A **data table** toggle button to show or hide the data table
        associated with the layer

      - **Download data** allows you to download the data for this layer in GeoJSON format for use in other mapping software

      - **Edit layer** is the same as edit button above

      - **Remove layer** will remove this layer from the current map.     

### Create a boundary layer { #create-a-boundary-layer } 

To create boundary layer, choose **Boundaries** on the **Add
layer**selection. This opens the Boundary layer configuration dialog.

1.  In the **ORGANISATION UNITS** tab

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_boundary_layer_dialog_ORG_UNITS.png)

      - select the organisation unit level(s) and/or group(s) from the
        selection fields on the right hand side.

      - Select the organisation units you want to include in the layer.
        It is possible to select either

          - One or more specific organisation units, or

          - A relative level in the organisation unit hierarchy, with
            respect to the user. By selecting a **User organisation
            unit** the map data will appear differently for users at
            different levels in the organisation unit hierarchy.

2.  In the **STYLE** tab:

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_boundary_layer_dialog_STYLE.png)

      - select any styling you wish to apply to the boundaries.

          - Show labels  

            Allows labels to be shown on the layer. Font size and weight
            can be modified here.

          - Point radius  

            Sets the base radius when point type elements, such as
            facilities, are presented on the boundary layer.

3.  Click **ADD LAYER**.

### Modify a boundary layer { #modify-a-boundary-layer } 

1.  In the layer panel, click the edit (pencil) icon on the boundary
    layer card.

2.  Modify the setting on the ORGANISATION UNITS and STYLE tabs as
    desired.

3.  Click **UPDATE LAYER**.

### Filter values in a boundary layer { #filter-values-in-a-boundary-layer } 

Boundary layers have a **data table** option that can be toggled on or
off from the boundary layer card.

![](resources/images/maps/maps_bound_layer_data_table.png)

The data table displays the data forming the boundary layer.

  - clicking on a title will sort the table based on that column;
    toggling between ascending and descending.

  - entering text or expressions into the filter fields below the titles
    will apply those filters to the data, and the display will adjust
    according to the filter. The filters are applied as follows:

      - NAME  

        filter by name containing the given text

      - LEVEL  

        filter level by numbers and/or ranges, for example: 2,\>3&\<8

      - PARENT  

        filter by parent names containing the given text

      - ID  

        filter by IDs containing the given text

      - TYPE  

        filter by GIS display types containing the given text

> **Note**
>
> Data table filters are temporary and are not saved with the map layers
> as part of the favourite.

### Search for an organisational unit { #search-for-an-organisational-unit } 

The NAME filter field in the data table provides an effective way of
searching for individual organisational units displayed in the boundary
layer.

### Navigate between organisation hierarchies { #navigate-between-organisation-hierarchies } 

You can modify the target of the boundary layer in the hierarchy without
using the level/parent user interface.

1.  Right-click one of the boundaries.

2.  Select **Drill up one level** or **Drill down one level**.

    The drill down option is disabled if you are on the lowest level.
    Likewise the drill up option is disabled from the highest level.

### Remove boundary layer { #remove-boundary-layer } 

To clear all data in a boundary layer:

1.  In the layer card to the left, click the *more actions* (three dots) icon
    and then on **Remove layer**.

    The layer is removed from the current map.

## Manage Earth Engine layer { #using_maps_gee } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:using_maps_gee-->


![](resources/images/maps/maps_earth_eng_layer.png)

The Google Earth Engine layer lets you display satellite imagery and
geospatial datasets from Google's vast catalog. These layers is useful
in combination with thematic and event layers to enhance analysis. The
following layers are supported:

  - Population density estimates with national totals adjusted to match
    UN population division estimates. Population in 100 x 100 m grid
    cells (from 2010).

  - Elevation above sea-level. You can adjust the min and max values so
    it better represents the terrain in your region.

  - Temperature: Land surface temperatures collected from satellite.
    Blank spots will appear in areas with a persistent cloud cover.

  - Precipitation collected from satellite and weather stations on the
    ground. The values are in millimeters within 5 days periods. Updated
    monthly, during the 3rd week of the following month.

  - Land cover: 17 distinct landcover types collected from satellites.

  - Nighttime lights: Lights from cities, towns, and other sites with
    persistent lighting, including gas flares (from 2013).

### Create an Earth Engine layer { #create-an-earth-engine-layer } 

To create an Earth Engine layer, choose the desired layer from the **Add
layer**selection. This opens the layer configuration dialog.

1.  In the **STYLE** tab

    ![](resources/images/maps/maps_ee_layer_dialog_POPULATION.png)

      - Modify the parameters specific to the layer type.

      - Adjust the legend range, steps and colors, as desired.

2.  Click **ADD LAYER**.

## Add external map layers { #using_maps_external_map_layers } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:using_maps_external_map_layers-->

External map layers are represented as either:

  - Basemaps  

    These are available in the **basemap** card in the layers panel and
    are selected as any other basemap.

  - Overlays  

    These are available in the **Add layer** selection. Unlike basemaps,
    overlays can be placed above or below any other overlay layers.

Overlay layers are represented by additional layer *cards* in the layer
panel such as:

Along the top of the overlay card from left to right are:

  - A grab field to allow dragging and re-ordering layers with the mouse

  - The title of the external map layer

  - An arrow symbol to collapse and expand the overlay card

Along the bottom of the overlay card from left to right are:

  - A slider for modifying the layer transparency

  - A delete (trash can) icon to remove the layer from the current
    thematic map.

Here are some examples of external layers:


![](resources/images/maps/maps_black_basemap_and_nighttime_lights.png)

![](resources/images/maps/maps_terrain_imagery.png)

![](resources/images/maps/maps_aerial_imagery.png)

## File menu { #using_maps_file_menu } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:using_maps_file_menu-->

Use the **File menu** to manage your maps. Several menu items will be
disabled until you open or save a map.

Saving your maps makes it easy to restore them later. It also gives you
the opportunity to share them with other users as an interpretation or
put it on the dashboard. You can save all types of layer configurations
as a favorite.

### Create a new map { #create-a-new-map } 

Click **File** \> **New**.

NB\! This will clear the current map layers you have without saving.

### Open a new map { #open-a-new-map } 

1.  Click **File** \> **Open**. A dialog box opens with a list of maps.

2.  Find the favorite you want to open. You can either use \< and \> or
    the search field to find a saved map. The list is filtered on every
    character that you enter. You can filter the list by selecting
    **Show all**, **Created by me** or **Created by others**.

3.  Click the name of the map you want to open.

### Save a map { #save-a-map } 

When you have created a map it is convenient to save it for later use:

1.  Click **File** \> **Save**.

2.  Enter a **Name** (required) and a **Description** (optional) the
    first time you save a map.

3.  Click **SAVE**.

### Save a copy of a map { #save-a-copy-of-a-map } 

1.  Click **File** \> **Save as...**

2.  Enter a **Name** (required) and a **Description** (optional) for the
    map.

3.  Click **SAVE**.

### Rename a map { #rename-a-map } 

1.  Click **File** \> **Rename**.

2.  Enter a new **Name** and/or **Description** for your map.

3.  Click **RENAME**. The map is updated.

### Translate a map { #translate-a-map } 

1.  Click **File** \> **Translate**.

2.  Select the **Locale** (language) your translation.

3.  Enter a translated **Name** and **Description**. The original text
    will show below the field.

4.  Click **SAVE**.

### Modify sharing settings for a map { #modify-sharing-settings-for-a-map } 

After you have created a map and saved it, you can share the map with
everyone or a user group. To modify the sharing settings:

1.  Click **File** \> **Share**. The sharing settings dialog opens.

2.  In the text box, search for the name of the user or group you want
    to share your favorite with and select it.

    The chosen user or group is added to the list of recipients.

    Repeat the step to add more user groups.

3.  If you want to allow external access, select the corresponding box.

4.  For each user group, choose an access setting. The options are:

      - None (for default groups only, as they cannot be removed)

      - Can view

      - Puede editar y visualizar

5.  Click **CLOSE** to close the dialog.

### Get the link to a map { #get-the-link-to-a-map } 

1.  Click **File** \> **Get link**. A link dialog opens.

2.  Copy the link.

### Delete a map { #delete-a-map } 

1.  Click **File** \> **Delete**. A confirmation dialog is displayed.

2.  Click **DELETE** to confirm that you want to delete the favorite.
    Your map is deleted and the layers are cleared from the view.

## Map interpretations { #mapsInterpretation } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:mapsInterpretation-->

An interpretation is a description of a map at a given period. This
information is visible in the **Dashboard app**. Click
**Interpretations** in the top right of the workspace to open the
interpretations panel. The button is only clickable if the map is saved.

![](resources/images/maps/maps_interpretations_panel.png)

### View interpretations based on relative periods { #view-interpretations-based-on-relative-periods } 

To view interpretations for relative periods, such as a year ago:

1.  Open a favorite with interpretations.

2.  Click **Interpretations** in the top right of the workspace to open
    the interpretations panel.

3.  Click an interpretation. Your map displays the data and the date
    based on when the interpretation was created. To view other
    interpretations, click them.

### Write interpretation for a map { #write-interpretation-for-a-map } 

To create an interpretation, you first need to create a map and save it.
If you've shared your map with other people, the interpretation you
write is visible to those people.

1.  Open a favorite with interpretations.

2.  Click **Interpretations** in the top right of the workspace to open
    the interpretations panel.

3.  A text field will appear with a placeholder "Write an interpretation" for users
    that have read access to the favorite.

4.  In the text field, type a comment, question or interpretation. You
    can also mention other users with '@username'. Start by typing '@'
    plus the first letters of the username or real name and a mentioning
    bar will display the available users. Mentioned users will receive
    an internal DHIS2 message with the interpretation or comment. You
    can see the interpretation in the **Dashboard app**.

5.  Click **SAVE** if you want your interpretation to have the same
    sharing settings as the map.

    Click **SAVE & SHARE** if you want to change the sharing settings
    (see below) for your interpretation.

### Change sharing settings for an interpretation { #change-sharing-settings-for-an-interpretation } 

1.  Click an interpretation (see how to view an interpretation above).

2.  Click **Share** below the interpretation. The sharing settings
    dialog opens.

3.  Search for and add a users and user groups that you want to share
    your map with.

4.  Change sharing settings for the users you want to modify:

      - **Can edit and view**: Everyone can view and edit the object.

      - **Can view only**: Everyone can view the object.

      - **No access**: The public won't have access to the object. This
        setting is only applicable to Public access.

5.  Click **CLOSE** when sharing settings are updated.

## Save a map as an image { #using_maps_image_export } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:using_maps_image_export-->

You can download your map as an image by clicking on the Download button in the top menu

![](resources/images/maps/maps_download.png)

Map download is not supported in Internet Explorer or Safari, we recommend to
use Google Chrome or Firefox.

1.  Select if you want to include the map name or not. This option is only
    available if the map is saved.

2.  Select if you want to include the map legend. You can position the legend
    in one of the 4 corners of your map.

3.  Click **Download** to download your map.  

## Search for a location { #using_maps_search } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:using_maps_search-->

The place search function allows you to search for almost any location
or address. This function is useful in order to locate for example
sites, facilities, villages or towns on the map.


![](resources/images/maps/maps_place_search.png)

1.  On the right side of the Maps window, click the magnifier icon.

2.  Type the location you're looking.

    A list of matching locations appear as you type.

3.  From the list, select a location. A pin indicates the location on
    the map.

## Measure distances and areas in a map { #using_maps_measure_distance } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:using_maps_measure_distance-->

1.  In the upper left part of the map, put the cursor on the **Measure
    distances and areas** (ruler) icon and click **Create new
    measurement**.

2.  Add points to the map.

3.  Click **Finish measurement**.


![](resources/images/maps/maps_measure_distance.png)

## Get the latitude and longitude at any location { #using_maps_latitude_longitude } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:using_maps_latitude_longitude-->

Right-click a point on the map and select **Show longitude/latitude**.
The values display in a pop-up window.

## See also { #see-also } 

  - [Manage
    legends](https://docs.dhis2.org/master/en/user/html/manage_legend.html)


# Managing dashboards { #dashboard } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:dashboard-->

## About dashboards { #about-dashboards } 

Dashboards are intended to provide quick access to different analytical
objects (maps, charts, reports, tables, etc) to an individual user.
Dashboards can also be shared with user groups.

A user or administrator could create a dashboard called "Antenatal care"
which might contain all relevant information on antenatal care. This
dashboard could then be shared with the user group called "ANC control",
which might consist of all users of the ANC control program. All users
within this group would then be able to view the same dashboard.

## Dashboard and control bar { #dashboards_setup } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:dashboards_setup-->

Dashboards have a title, description, and any number of dashboard items.
The dashboard items can be of many different types, including charts,
maps, reports, tables, resources, messages, and text items. Above the
dashboard is the control bar, which shows all your available dashboards,
including a dashboard search field, and a **+** button for creating a
new dashboard.

The dashboard has two modes: view and edit/create. When you first log in
to DHIS2, your most recently used dashboard will be displayed in view
mode, if you are on the same computer as you were previously. If you are
using a different computer, then the first starred dashboard will be
displayed. If there are no starred dashboards, then the first dashboard (alphabetically)
will be displayed. Starred dashboards always show first in the dashboard
list.

The screenshot below shows a dashboard called "Antenatal Care", which
has been populated with charts and maps.


![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-view-mode.png)

### Searching in the list of dashboards { #searching-in-the-list-of-dashboards } 

You can search for a specific dashboard using the search field in the
upper left of the control bar entitled “Search for a dashboard”. The
search is case insensitive, and as you type, the list of dashboards will
filter down to those that match your search text.

### Customizing the height of the control bar { #customizing-the-height-of-the-control-bar } 

You can set a specific height for the dashboards control bar by
down-clicking and dragging the bottom edge of the control bar. When you
finish dragging, the new height will be set. Clicking on **SHOW MORE**
will expand the control bar to its maximum height (10 "rows"). Clicking
on **SHOW LESS** will reset the height to your customized height.

## Creating a dashboard { #creating-a-dashboard } 

To create a new dashboard, click the green **+** button in the left
corner of the control bar to go into create mode. Add a title in the
title field, and optionally a description in the description field.


![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-add-new.png)

**Create mode:**

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-create-mode.png)

### Adding items to the dashboard { #adding-items-to-the-dashboard } 

Add items to the dashboard by searching from the item selector in the
upper right part of the dashboard area. Available items include:

  - Tablas dinámicas

  - Gráficas

  - Mapas

  - Event reports

  - Event charts

  - Informes

  - Resources

  - Apps

  - Correo electrónico

  - Text boxes

  - Spacer

The list of items in the drop-down initially displays the first 5
available from each category, based on the search text you enter. Email,
text boxes and spacer items are also found in the drop-down. To view more
items, click on **SEE MORE**, and the list for that type will be
extended to 15 items. If you still do not find the item you want, try
typing a more specific search text.

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-item-selector.png)

Once you select an item, it will be added to the top left position of
the dashboard. The added items can be moved using the mouse by
down-clicking on the item and dragging it to the desired position. It
can also be resized with the mouse by down-clicking on the drag handle
in the lower right corner of the item and dragging to the desired size.

### Spacer items { #spacer-items } 

The dashboard is configured with the "anti-gravity" setting for
positioning items. This means that items will "rise" upwards until they
run into another item. In order to force empty vertical space between
items (like an empty row), you can add spacer items to the dashboard.
They are only visible in edit/create mode. In view mode, they are not
displayed, but take up the defined space.

**Spacer in edit/create mode:**

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-spacer-edit-mode.png)

**Spacer in view mode:**

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-spacer-view-mode.png)



## Removing items { #removing-items } 

Remove items by clicking on the red trash can at the upper right of the
item. Be aware that because of the "anti-gravity" setting in the
dashboard, when you remove an item, the items that are positioned below
the removed item will "rise" upwards.

## Saving the dashboard { #saving-the-dashboard } 

When creating or editing a dashboard, changes are only saved when you
click **SAVE CHANGES** button in the dashboard edit bar at the top of
the page. If you don't want to save your changes, click the **EXIT
WITHOUT SAVING** button to the upper right. You will then be returned to
view mode with the dashboard you were previously viewing.



## Editing an existing dashboard { #editing-an-existing-dashboard } 

If you have access rights to edit the currently active dashboard, there
will be an **EDIT** button to the right of the dashboard title in view
mode. Click on this button to enter edit mode.


![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-title-bar.png)

Refer to the above section about creating dashboards for information on
adding and removing items to the dashboard.

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-edit-mode.png)

### Translating dashboard title and description { #translating-dashboard-title-and-description } 

You can add translations for dashboard title and description while in
edit mode. The dialog provides a list of languages to translate to, and
shows the original dashboard title underneath the name input field.

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-translation-dialog.png)

1.  Click on the **TRANSLATE** button located above the dashboard

2.  Select the language you wish to add a translation for.

3.  Add the title and/or description, and click **SAVE**

## Deleting a dashboard { #deleting-a-dashboard } 

If you have access to delete the dashboard, then there will be a
**DELETE** button located above the dashboard, when in edit mode. A
confirmation dialog will first be displayed to confirm that you want to
delete the dashboard.


## Viewing a dashboard { #viewing-a-dashboard } 

When in view mode, you can toggle showing the description, star a
dashboard, apply filters, and share the dashboard with other
users and groups.

To view the description, click on the **i** button to the right of the
title


![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-title-bar.png)

### Starred dashboards { #starred-dashboards } 

Your starred dashboards are listed first in the list of dashboards. To
star a dashboard, click on the star button to the right of the title.
When the star is “filled”, that means the dashboard is starred. Starring
a dashboard only applies to you, not other users.

### Filtering a dashboard { #filtering-a-dashboard } 

Multiple filters can be applied to a dashboard for changing the data 
displayed in the various dashboard items.
The filters are applied to each dashboard item in the same way:
each added filter overrides the original value for that dimension in
the original chart, table or map (visualization).
It is possible to filter on Organisation Units, Periods and other 
dynamic dimensions depending on the DHIS2 instance.

To add a filter, click on the **Add Filter** button and choose the
dimension:

![Adding a filter](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-filters.png)

A dialog opens where the filter selection can be made.

![Org Unit filter selection](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-orgunit-filter-dialog.png)

Click on **Confirm** in the dialog to apply the filter to the 
current dashboard.

Filters are not stored, so when switching to a different dashboard they
are lost.
Filter badges appear above the dashboard items to
indicate that what is shown in the dashboard items is not the original
visualization, but a manipulated one where the filters override
the stored dimensions' values.

![Current filters displayed as badges above the dashboard](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-filter-badges.png)

Filter badges can be clicked for opening the filter selection dialogs
thus allowing for filter editing.
A filter can be removed by clicking on the **Remove** button in the badge.
Whenever a filter is added, edited or removed, the dashboard items
reload to show the updated data.
Filter badges are always visible at the top of the page when 
scrolling the dashboard content.

## Dashboard items with charts, pivot tables and maps { #dashboard-items-with-charts-pivot-tables-and-maps } 

### Switching between visualizations { #switching-between-visualizations } 

Dashboard items showing charts, pivot tables and maps can be toggled
between these visualizations. Click on the buttons in the upper right
corner of the item to toggle between visualizations.


![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-pluginitem-buttons.png)

## Interpretations { #interpretations } 

You can write interpretations for the chart, pivot table, map, event
report, and event chart items. Click on the interpretations button
![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-interpretations-button.png),
and the item will be expanded vertically underneath to show the
interpretations and replies. You can like an interpretation, reply to an
interpretation, and add your own interpretation. You can edit, share or delete
your own interpretations and replies, and if you have moderator access,
you can delete others’ interpretations.

It is possible to format the description field, and interpretations 
with **bold**, *italic* by using the Markdown style markers \* and \_ 
for **bold** and *italic* respectively. The text field for writing new
interpretations has a toolbar for adding rich text. Keyboard shortcuts
are also available: Ctrl/Cmd + B and Ctrl/Cmd + I. A limited set of
smilies is supported and can be used by typing one of the following
character combinations: :) :-) :( :-( :+1 :-1. URLs are automatically
detected and converted into a clickable link.

Interpretations are sorted in descending order by date, with the most recent shown on top.
Interpretation replies are sorted in ascending order by date, with the oldest shown on top.

![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-interpretations.png)

## Sharing a dashboard { #dashboard_sharing } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:dashboard_sharing-->

In order to share a dashboard with user groups, click on the **SHARE**
button to the right of the dashboard title to display the dashboard
sharing settings options. To share the dashboard with specific users or
user groups, type in the name in the input field to add them to the
dashboard sharing settings


![](resources/images/dashboard/dashboard-sharing-dialog.png)

All dashboards have two sharing groups set by default.

  - External access (without login)

    This option, when selected, provides access to the dashboard as an
    external resource. This is useful for when you are creating an
    external web portal but would like to call information from a
    dashboard you have made internally within DHIS2. By default, this
    option is not selected.

  - Public access (with login)

    This option allows the selected dashboard to be pushed to all users
    within your DHIS2 instance. This can also be hidden from public view
    by selecting the "None" option, which is the default option for new
    dashboards.

User groups that have been added manually can be assigned two types of
permissions within the dashboard

  - Can view

    Provides the user group with view only rights to the dashboard.

  - Puede editar y visualizar

    Allows the user groups to edit the dashboard in addition to viewing
    it. Editing allows for altering the layout, resizing and removing
    items, renaming/deleting the dashboard etc.

You can provide users with the url of the dashboard, allowing them to
navigate directly to the dashboard. To get the dashboard url, just
access the dashboard in view mode, and copy the browser url. For
example, the url to the Antenatal Care dashboard in play.dhis2.org/demo
is:

https://play.dhis2.org/demo/dhis-web-dashboard/\#/nghVC4wtyzi


# Using the Event Reports app { #event_reports_app } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:event_reports_app-->

## About the Event Reports app { #event_reports_about } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:event_reports_about-->


![](resources/images/event_report/event_report.png)

With the **Event Report**s app you can analyse events in two types of
reports:

  - Aggregated event reports: Pivot table-style analysis with aggregated
    numbers of events

    By selecting **Aggregated values** from the top-left menu you can
    use the **Event Reports** app to create pivot tables with aggregated
    numbers of events. An event report is always based on a program. You
    can do analysis based on a range of dimensions. Each dimension can
    have a corresponding filter. Dimensions can be selected from the
    left-side menu. Similar to the pivot tables app, aggregated event
    reports may be limited by the amount of RAM accessible by the
    browser. If your requested table exceeds a set size, you will
    recieve a warning prompt asking whether or not you want to continue.

  - Individual event reports: Lists of events

    By selecting **Events** from the top-left menu you can use the
    **Event Reports** app to make searches or queries for events based
    on a flexible set of criteria. The report will be displayed as a
    table with one row per event. Each dimension can be used as a column
    in the table or as a filter. Each dimension can have a criteria
    (filter). Data elements of type option set allows for "in" criteria,
    where multiple options can be selected. Numeric values can be
    compared to filter values using greater than, equal or less than
    operators.

## Create an event report { #event_reports_create } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:event_reports_create-->

1.  Open the **Event Reports** app.

2.  Select **Aggregated values** or **Events**.

3.  In the menu to the left, select the meta data you want to analyse.

4.  Click **Layout** and arrange the dimensions.

    You can keep the default selection if you want.

5.  Click **Actualizar**.

## Select dimension items { #event_reports_select_dimensions } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:event_reports_select_dimensions-->

An event report is always based on a program and you can do analysis
based on a range of dimensions. For programs with category combinations,
you can use program categories and category option group sets as
dimensions for tables and charts. Each dimension item can have a
corresponding filter.

1.  Select data elements:

    1.  Click **Data**.

    2.  Select a program and a program stage.

        The data elements associated with the selected program are
        listed under **Available**. Each data element acts as a
        dimension.

    3.  Select the data elements you need by double-clicking their
        names.

        Data elements can be filtered by type (Data elements, Program
        attributes, Program indicators) and are prefixed to make them
        easily recognizable.

        After selecting a data element, it is visible under **Selected
        data items**.

    4.  (Optional) For each data element, specify a filter with
        operators such as "greater than", "in" or "equal" together with
        a filter value.

2.  Select periods.

    1.  Click **Periods**.

    2.  Select one or several periods.

        You have three period options: relative periods, fixed periods
        and start/end dates. You can combine fixed periods and relative
        periods in the same chart. You cannot combine fixed periods and
        relative periods with start/end dates in the same chart.
        Overlapping periods are filtered so that they only appear once.

          - Fixed periods: In the **Select period type** box, select a
            period type. You can select any number of fixed periods from
            any period type. Fixed periods can for example be "January
            2014".

          - Relative periods: In the lower part of the **Periods**
            section, select as many relative periods as you like. The
            names are relative to the current date. This means that if
            the current month is March and you select **Last month**,
            the month of February is included in the chart. Relative
            periods has the advantage that it keeps the data in the
            report up to date as time goes.

          - Start/end dates: In the list under the **Periods** tab,
            select **Start/end dates**. This period type lets you
            specify flexible dates for the time span in the report.

3.  Select organisation units.

    1.  Click **Organisation units**.

    2.  Click the gearbox icon.

    3.  Select a **Selection mode** and an organisation unit.

        There are three different selection modes:

        <table>
        <caption>Selection modes</caption>
        <colgroup>
        <col style="width: 38%" />
        <col style="width: 61%" />
        </colgroup>
        <thead>
        <tr class="header">
        <th><p>Selection mode</p></th>
        <th><p>Description</p></th>
        </tr>
        </thead>
        <tbody>
        <tr class="odd">
        <td><p><strong>Select organisation units</strong></p></td>
        <td><p>Lets you select the organisation units you want to appear in the chart from the organization tree.</p>
        <p>Select <strong>User org unit</strong> to disable the organisation unit tree and only select the organisation unit that is related to your profile.</p>
        <p>Select <strong>User sub-units</strong> to disable the organisation unit tree and only select the sub-units of the organisation unit that is related to your profile.</p>
        <p>Select <strong>User sub-x2-units</strong> to disable the organisation unit tree and only select organisation units two levels down from the organisation unit that is related to your profile.</p>
        <p>This functionality is useful for administrators to create a meaningful &quot;system&quot; favorite. With this option checked all users find their respective organisation unit when they open the favorite.</p></td>
        </tr>
        <tr class="even">
        <td><p><strong>Select levels</strong></p></td>
        <td><p>Lets you select all organisation units at one or more levels, for example national or district level.</p>
        <p>You can also select the parent organisation unit in the tree, which makes it easy to select for example, all facilities inside one or more districts.</p></td>
        </tr>
        <tr class="odd">
        <td><p><strong>Select groups</strong></p></td>
        <td><p>Lets you select all organisation units inside one or several groups and parent organisation units at the same time, for example hospitals or chiefdoms.</p></td>
        </tr>
        </tbody>
        </table>

4.  Click **Actualizar**.

## Select series, category and filter { #event_reports_select_series_category_filter } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:event_reports_select_series_category_filter-->

You can define which data dimension you want to appear as columns, rows
and filters in the pivot table. Each data element appears as individual
dimensions and can be placed on any of the axes.

> **Note**
> 
> Data elements of continuous value types (real numbers/decimal numbers)
> can only be used as filters, and will automatically be positioned as
> filters in the layout dialog. The reason for this is that continuous
> number cannot be grouped into sensible ranges and used on columns and
> rows.

1.  Click **Layout**.

2.  Drag and drop the dimensions to the appropriate space.

3.  Click **Actualizar**.

## Change the display of your table { #event_reports_change_display } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:event_reports_change_display-->

You can customize the display of an event report.

1.  Click **Options**.

2.  Set the options as required. Available options are different between
    aggregated event reports and individual event reports.

    <table style="width:100%;">
    <caption>Event reports options</caption>
    <colgroup>
    <col style="width: 22%" />
    <col style="width: 22%" />
    <col style="width: 33%" />
    <col style="width: 22%" />
    </colgroup>
    <thead>
    <tr class="header">
    <th><p>Option</p></th>
    <th><p>Description</p></th>
    <th><p>Available for report type</p></th>
    </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p><strong>Data</strong></p></td>
    <td><p><strong>Show column totals</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Displays totals at the end of each column in the pivot table.</p></td>
    <td><p>Aggregated event report</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Show column sub-totals</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Displays sub-totals for each column in the pivot table.</p></td>
    <td><p>Aggregated event report</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Show row totals</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Displays totals at the end of each row in the pivot table.</p></td>
    <td><p>Aggregated event report</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Show row sub-totals</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Displays sub-totals for each row in the pivot table.</p></td>
    <td><p>Aggregated event report</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Show dimension labels</strong></p></td>
    <td>Displays labels for dimensions.</td>
    <td><p>Aggregated event report</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Hide empty rows</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Hides empty rows in the pivot table.</p></td>
    <td><p>Aggregated event report</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Hide n/a data</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Hides data tagged as N/A from the chart.</p></td>
    <td><p>Aggregated event report</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Include only completed events</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Includes only completed events in the aggregation process. This is useful when you want for example to exclude partial events in indicator calculations.</p></td>
    <td><p>Aggregated event report</p>
    <p>Individual event report</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Limit</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Sets a limit of the maximum number of rows that you can display in the table, combined with a setting for showing top or bottom values.</p></td>
    <td><p>Aggregated event report</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Output type</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Defines the output type. The output types are <strong>Event</strong>, <strong>Enrollment</strong> and<strong>Tracked entity instance</strong>.</p></td>
    <td><p>Aggregated event report</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Program status</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Filters data based on the program status: <strong>All</strong>, <strong>Active</strong>, <strong>Completed</strong> or <strong>Cancelled</strong>.</p></td>
    <td><p>Aggregated event report</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Event status</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Filters data based on the event status: <strong>All</strong>, <strong>Active</strong>, <strong>Completed</strong>, <strong>Scheduled</strong>, <strong>Overdue</strong> or <strong>Skipped</strong>.</p></td>
    <td><p>Aggregated event report</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><strong>Organisation units</strong></td>
    <td><p><strong>Show hierarchy</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Includes the names of all parents of each organisation unit in labels.</p></td>
    <td><p>Aggregated event report</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p><strong>Style</strong></p></td>
    <td><p><strong>Display density</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Controls the size of the cells in the table. You can set it to <strong>Comfortable</strong>, <strong>Normal</strong> or <strong>Compact</strong>.</p>
    <p><strong>Compact</strong> is useful when you want to fit large tables into the browser screen.</p></td>
    <td><p>Aggregated event report</p>
    <p>Individual event report</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Font size</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Controls the size of the table text font. You can set it to <strong>Large</strong>, <strong>Normal</strong> or <strong>Small</strong>.</p></td>
    <td><p>Aggregated event report</p>
    <p>Individual event report</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Digit group separator</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Controls which character to separate groups of digits or &quot;thousands&quot;. You can set it to <strong>Comma</strong>, <strong>Space</strong> or <strong>None</strong>.</p></td>
    <td><p>Aggregated event report</p>
    <p>Individual event report</p></td>
    </tr>
    </tbody>
    </table>

3.  Click **Actualizar**.

## Download chart data source { #event_reports_download_report } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:event_reports_download_report-->

You can download the data source behind an event report in HTML, JSON,
XML, Microsoft Excel or CSV formats.

1.  Click **Download**.

2.  Under **Plain data source**, click the format you want to download.

    <table>
    <caption>Available formats</caption>
    <colgroup>
    <col style="width: 27%" />
    <col style="width: 72%" />
    </colgroup>
    <thead>
    <tr class="header">
    <th><p>Format</p></th>
    <th><p>Description</p></th>
    </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>HTML</p></td>
    <td><p>Creates HTML table based on selected meta data</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p>JSON</p></td>
    <td><p>Downloads data values in JSON format based on selected meta data</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>XML</p></td>
    <td><p>Downloads data values in XML format based on selected meta data</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p>Microsoft Excel</p></td>
    <td><p>Downloads data values in Microsoft Excel format based on selected meta data</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>CSV</p></td>
    <td><p>Downloads data values in CSV format based on selected meta data</p></td>
    </tr>
    </tbody>
    </table>

## Manage favorites { #manage-favorites } 

Saving your charts or pivot tables as favorites makes it easy to find
them later. You can also choose to share them with other users as an
interpretation or display them on the dashboard.

You view the details and interpretations of your favorites in the
**Pivot Table**, **Data Visualizer**, **Event Visualizer**, **Event
Reports** apps. Use the **Favorites** menu to manage your favorites.

### Open a favorite { #open-a-favorite } 

1.  Click **Favorites** \> **Open**.

2.  Enter the name of a favorite in the search field, or click **Prev**
    and **Next** to display favorites.

3.  Click the name of the favorite you want to open.

### Save a favorite { #save-a-favorite } 

1.  Click **Favorites** \> **Save as**.

2.  Enter a **Name** and a **Description** for your favorite. The description field supports a rich text format, see the interpretations section for more details.

3.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Rename a favorite { #rename-a-favorite } 

1.  Click **Favorites** \> **Rename**.

2.  Enter the new name for your favorite.

3.  Click **Actualizar**.

### Write an interpretation for a favorite { #write-an-interpretation-for-a-favorite } 

An interpretation is a link to a resource with a description of the data
at a given period. This information is visible in the **Dashboard** app.
To create an interpretation, you first need to create a favorite. If
you've shared your favorite with other people, the interpretation you
write is visible to those people.

1.  Click **Favorites** \> **Write interpretation**.

2.  In the text field, type a comment, question or interpretation. You
    can also mention other users with '@username'. Start by typing '@'
    plus the first letters of the username or real name and a mentioning
    bar will display the available users. Mentioned users will receive
    an internal DHIS2 message with the interpretation or comment. You
    can see the interpretation in the **Dashboard** app.

    It is possible to format the text with **bold**, *italic* by using the
    Markdown style markers \* and \_ for **bold** and *italic* respectively.
    Keyboard shortcuts are also available: Ctrl/Cmd + B and Ctrl/Cmd + I. A
    limited set of smilies is supported and can be used by typing one of the
    following character combinations: :) :-) :( :-( :+1 :-1. URLs are
    automatically detected and converted into a clickable link.

3.  Search for a user group that you want to share your favorite with,
    then click the **+** icon.

4.  Change sharing settings for the user groups you want to modify.

      - **Can edit and view**: Everyone can view and edit the object.

      - **Can view only**: Everyone can view the object.

      - **None**: The public won't have access to the object. This
        setting is only applicable to **Public access**.

5.  Click **Share**.

### Subscribe to a favorite { #subscribe-to-a-favorite } 

When you are subscribed to a favorite, you receive internal messages
whenever another user likes/creates/updates an interpretation or
creates/update an interpretation comment of this favorite.

1.  Open a favorite.

2.  Click **\>\>\>** in the top right of the workspace.

3.  Click on the upper-right bell icon to subscribe to this favorite.

### Create a link to a favorite { #create-a-link-to-a-favorite } 

1.  Click **Favorites** \> **Get link**.

2.  Select one of the following:

      - **Open in this app**: You get a URL for the favorite which you
        can share with other users by email or chat.

      - **Open in web api**: You get a URL of the API resource. By
        default this is an HTML resource, but you can change the file
        extension to ".json" or ".csv".

### Delete a favorite { #delete-a-favorite } 

1.  Click **Favorites** \> **Delete**.

2.  Click **OK**.

### View interpretations based on relative periods { #view-interpretations-based-on-relative-periods } 

To view interpretations for relative periods, such as a year ago:

1.  Open a favorite with interpretations.

2.  Click **\>\>\>** in the top right of the workspace.

3.  Click an interpretation. Your chart displays the data and the date
    based on when the interpretation was created.To view other
    interpretations, click them.

## Visualize an event report as a chart { #event_reports_open_as_chart } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:event_reports_open_as_chart-->

When you have made an event report you can open it as a chart:

Click **Chart** \> **Open this chart as table**.



# Using the Event Visualizer app { #event_visualizer_app } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:event_visualizer_app-->

## About the Event Visualizer app { #about-the-event-visualizer-app } 


![](resources/images/event_visualizer/event_visualizer.png)

With the **Event Visualizer** app, you can create charts based on event
data.

## Create a chart { #create-a-chart } 

1.  \<Open the **Event Visualizer** app and select a chart type.

2.  In the menu to the left, select the meta data you want to analyse.

3.  Click **Layout** and arrange the dimensions.

    You can keep the default selection if you want.

4.  Click **Actualizar**.

## Select a chart type { #select-a-chart-type } 

The **Event Visualizer** app has eight different chart types, each with
different characteristics. To select a chart type:

1.  In **Chart type**, click the chart type you need.

    <table>
    <caption>Chart types</caption>
    <colgroup>
    <col style="width: 33%" />
    <col style="width: 66%" />
    </colgroup>
    <thead>
    <tr class="header">
    <th><p>Chart type</p></th>
    <th><p>Description</p></th>
    </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>Column chart</p></td>
    <td><p>Displays information as vertical rectangular columns with lengths proportional to the values they represent.</p>
    <p>Useful when you want to, for example, compare performance of different districts.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p>Stacked column chart</p></td>
    <td><p>Displays information as vertical rectangular columns, where bars representing multiple categories are stacked on top of each other.</p>
    <p>Useful when you want to, for example, display trends or sums of related data elements.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>Bar chart</p></td>
    <td><p>Same as column chart, only with horizontal bars.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p>Stacked bar chart</p></td>
    <td><p>Same as stacked column chart, only with horizontal bars.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>Line chart</p></td>
    <td><p>Displays information as a series of points connected by straight lines. Also referred to as time series.</p>
    <p>Useful when you want to, for example, visualize trends in indicator data over multiple time periods.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p>Area chart</p></td>
    <td><p>Is based on line chart, with the space between the axis and the line filled with colors and the lines stacked on top of each other.</p>
    <p>Useful when you want to compare the trends of related indicators.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>Pie chart</p></td>
    <td><p>Circular chart divided into sectors (or slices).</p>
    <p>Useful when you want to, for example, visualize the proportion of data for individual data elements compared to the total sum of all data elements in the chart.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p>Radar chart</p></td>
    <td><p>Displays data on axes starting from the same point. Also known as spider chart.</p></td>
    </tr>
    </tbody>
    </table>

2.  Click **Actualizar**.

## Select dimension items { #event_visualizer_select_dimensions } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:event_visualizer_select_dimensions-->

An event chart is always based on a program and you can do analysis
based on a range of dimensions. For programs with category combinations,
you can use program categories and category option group sets as
dimensions for tables and charts. Each dimension item can have a
corresponding filter. You select dimension items from the left-side
menu.

1.  Select data elements:

    1.  Click **Data**.

    2.  Select a program and a program stage.

        The data elements associated with the selected program are
        listed under **Available**. Each data element acts as a
        dimension.

    3.  Select the data elements you need by double-clicking their
        names.

        Data elements can be filtered by type (Data elements, Program
        attributes, Program indicators) and are prefixed to make them
        easily recognizable.

        After selecting a data element, it is visible under **Selected
        data items**.

    4.  (Optional) For each data element, specify a filter with
        operators such as "greater than", "in" or "equal" together with
        a filter value.

2.  Select periods.

    1.  Click **Periods**.

    2.  Select one or several periods.

        You have three period options: relative periods, fixed periods
        and start/end dates. You can combine fixed periods and relative
        periods in the same chart. You cannot combine fixed periods and
        relative periods with start/end dates in the same chart.
        Overlapping periods are filtered so that they only appear once.

          - Fixed periods: In the **Select period type** box, select a
            period type. You can select any number of fixed periods from
            any period type. Fixed periods can for example be "January
            2014".

          - Relative periods: In the lower part of the **Periods**
            section, select as many relative periods as you like. The
            names are relative to the current date. This means that if
            the current month is March and you select **Last month**,
            the month of February is included in the chart. Relative
            periods has the advantage that it keeps the data in the
            report up to date as time goes.

          - Start/end dates: In the list under the **Periods** tab,
            select **Start/end dates**. This period type lets you
            specify flexible dates for the time span in the report.

3.  Select organisation units.

    1.  Click **Organisation units**.

    2.  Click the gearbox icon.

    3.  Select a **Selection mode** and an organisation unit.

        There are three different selection modes:

        <table>
        <caption>Selection modes</caption>
        <colgroup>
        <col style="width: 38%" />
        <col style="width: 61%" />
        </colgroup>
        <thead>
        <tr class="header">
        <th><p>Selection mode</p></th>
        <th><p>Description</p></th>
        </tr>
        </thead>
        <tbody>
        <tr class="odd">
        <td><p><strong>Select organisation units</strong></p></td>
        <td><p>Lets you select the organisation units you want to appear in the chart from the organization tree.</p>
        <p>Select <strong>User org unit</strong> to disable the organisation unit tree and only select the organisation unit that is related to your profile.</p>
        <p>Select <strong>User sub-units</strong> to disable the organisation unit tree and only select the sub-units of the organisation unit that is related to your profile.</p>
        <p>Select <strong>User sub-x2-units</strong> to disable the organisation unit tree and only select organisation units two levels down from the organisation unit that is related to your profile.</p>
        <p>This functionality is useful for administrators to create a meaningful &quot;system&quot; favorite. With this option checked all users find their respective organisation unit when they open the favorite.</p></td>
        </tr>
        <tr class="even">
        <td><p><strong>Select levels</strong></p></td>
        <td><p>Lets you select all organisation units at one or more levels, for example national or district level.</p>
        <p>You can also select the parent organisation unit in the tree, which makes it easy to select for example, all facilities inside one or more districts.</p></td>
        </tr>
        <tr class="odd">
        <td><p><strong>Select groups</strong></p></td>
        <td><p>Lets you select all organisation units inside one or several groups and parent organisation units at the same time, for example hospitals or chiefdoms.</p></td>
        </tr>
        </tbody>
        </table>

4.  Click **Actualizar**.

## Select series, category and filter { #select-series-category-and-filter } 

You can define which data dimension you want to appear as series,
category and filter. Each data element appears as individual dimensions
and can be placed on any of the axes. Series and category panels can
only have one dimension at the time.

> **Note**
> 
> Data elements of continuous value types (real numbers/decimal numbers)
> can only be used as filters, and will automatically be positioned as
> filters in the layout dialog. The reason for this is that continuous
> number cannot be grouped into sensible ranges and used on columns and
> rows.

1.  Click **Layout**.

2.  Drag and drop the dimensions to the appropriate space. Only one
    dimension can be in each section.

3.  Click **Actualizar**.

## Change the display of your chart { #event_visualizer_change_display } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:event_visualizer_change_display-->

You can customize the display of an event report.

1.  Click **Options**.

2.  Set the options as required.

    <table>
    <caption>Chart options</caption>
    <colgroup>
    <col style="width: 28%" />
    <col style="width: 28%" />
    <col style="width: 42%" />
    </colgroup>
    <thead>
    <tr class="header">
    <th><p>Option</p></th>
    <th><p>Description</p></th>
    </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p><strong>Data</strong></p></td>
    <td><p><strong>Show values</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Displays values as numbers on top of each series.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Use 100% stacked values</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Displays 100 % stacked values in column charts.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Use cumulative values</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Displays cumulative values in line charts.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Hide n/a data</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Hides data tagged as N/A from the chart.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Include only completed events</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Includes only completed events in the aggregation process. This is useful when you want for example to exclude partial events in indicator calculations.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Hide empty categories</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Hides the category items with no data from the chart.</p>
    <p><strong>None</strong>: doesn't hide any of the empty categories</p>
    <p><strong>Before first</strong>: hides missing values only before the first value</p>
    <p><strong>After last</strong>: hides missing values only after the last value</p>
    <p><strong>Before first and after last</strong>: hides missing values only before the first value and after the last value</p>
    <p><strong>All</strong>: hides all missing values</p>
    <p>This is useful for example when you create column and bar charts.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Trend line</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Displays the trend line which visualizes how your data evolves over time. For example if performance is improving or deteriorating. Useful when periods are selected as category.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Target line value/title</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Displays a horizontal line and title (optional) at the given domain value. Useful for example when you want to compare your performance to the current target.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Base line value/title</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Displays a horizontal line and title (optional) at the given domain value. Useful for example when you want to visualize how your performance has evolved since the beginning of a process.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Sort order</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Allows you to sort the values on your chart from either low to high or high to low.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Output type</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Defines the output type. The output types are <strong>Event</strong>, <strong>Enrollment</strong> and<strong>Tracked entity instance</strong>.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Program status</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Filters data based on the program status: <strong>All</strong>, <strong>Active</strong>, <strong>Completed</strong> or <strong>Cancelled</strong>.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Event status</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Filters data based on the event status: <strong>All</strong>, <strong>Active</strong>, <strong>Completed</strong>, <strong>Scheduled</strong>, <strong>Overdue</strong> or <strong>Skipped</strong>.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p><strong>Axes</strong></p></td>
    <td><p><strong>Range axis min/max</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Defines the maximum and minimum value which will be visible on the range axis.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Range axis tick steps</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Defines the number of ticks which will be visible on the range axis.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Range axis decimals</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Defines the number of decimals which will be used for range axis values.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Range axis title</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Type a title here to display a label next to the range axis (also referred to as the Y axis). Useful when you want to give context information to the chart, for example about the unit of measure.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Domain axis title</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Type a title here to display a label below the domain axis (also referred to as the X axis). Useful when you want to give context information to the chart, for example about the period type.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p><strong>General</strong></p></td>
    <td><p><strong>Hide chart legend</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Hides the legend and leaves more room for the chart itself.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Hide chart title</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Hides the title (default or custom) of your chart.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Chart title</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Type a title here to display a custom title above the chart. If you don't enter a title, the default title is displayed.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Hide chart subtitle</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Hides the subtitle of your chart.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td></td>
    <td><p><strong>Chart subtitle</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Type a subtitle here to display a custom subtitle above the chart but below the title. If you don't enter a subtitle, no subtitle is displayed in the chart.</p></td>
    </tr>
    </tbody>
    </table>

3.  Click **Actualizar**.

## Download a chart as an image or a PDF { #download-a-chart-as-an-image-or-a-pdf } 

After you have created a chart you can download it to your local
computer as an image or PDF file.

1.  Click **Download**.

2.  Under **Graphics**, click **PNG (.png)** or **PDF (.pdf)**.

    The file is automatically downloaded to your computer. Now you can
    for example embed the image file into a text document as part of a
    report.

## Download chart data source { #download-chart-data-source } 

You can download the data source behind a chart in HTML, JSON, XML,
Microsoft Excel or CSV formats. The data document uses identifiers of
the dimension items and opens in a new browser window to display the URL
of the request to the Web API in the address bar. This is useful for
developers of apps and other client modules based on the DHIS2 Web API
or for those who require a plan data source, for instance for import
into statistical packages.

To download plain data source formats:

1.  Click **Download**.

2.  Under **Plain data source**, click the format you want to download.

    <table>
    <caption>Available formats</caption>
    <colgroup>
    <col style="width: 27%" />
    <col style="width: 72%" />
    </colgroup>
    <thead>
    <tr class="header">
    <th><p>Format</p></th>
    <th><p>Description</p></th>
    </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>HTML</p></td>
    <td><p>Creates HTML table based on selected meta data</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p>JSON</p></td>
    <td><p>Downloads data values in JSON format based on selected meta data</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>XML</p></td>
    <td><p>Downloads data values in XML format based on selected meta data</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p>Microsoft Excel</p></td>
    <td><p>Downloads data values in Microsoft Excel format based on selected meta data</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>CSV</p></td>
    <td><p>Downloads data values in CSV format based on selected meta data</p></td>
    </tr>
    </tbody>
    </table>

## Manage favorites { #manage-favorites } 

Saving your charts or pivot tables as favorites makes it easy to find
them later. You can also choose to share them with other users as an
interpretation or display them on the dashboard.

You view the details and interpretations of your favorites in the
**Pivot Table**, **Data Visualizer**, **Event Visualizer**, **Event
Reports** apps. Use the **Favorites** menu to manage your favorites.

### Open a favorite { #open-a-favorite } 

1.  Click **Favorites** \> **Open**.

2.  Enter the name of a favorite in the search field, or click **Prev**
    and **Next** to display favorites.

3.  Click the name of the favorite you want to open.

### Save a favorite { #save-a-favorite } 

1.  Click **Favorites** \> **Save as**.

2.  Enter a **Name** and a **Description** for your favorite. The description field supports a rich text format, see the interpretations section for more details.

3.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Rename a favorite { #rename-a-favorite } 

1.  Click **Favorites** \> **Rename**.

2.  Enter the new name for your favorite.

3.  Click **Actualizar**.

### Write an interpretation for a favorite { #write-an-interpretation-for-a-favorite } 

An interpretation is a link to a resource with a description of the data
at a given period. This information is visible in the **Dashboard** app.
To create an interpretation, you first need to create a favorite. If
you've shared your favorite with other people, the interpretation you
write is visible to those people.

1.  Click **Favorites** \> **Write interpretation**.

2.  In the text field, type a comment, question or interpretation. You
    can also mention other users with '@username'. Start by typing '@'
    plus the first letters of the username or real name and a mentioning
    bar will display the available users. Mentioned users will receive
    an internal DHIS2 message with the interpretation or comment. You
    can see the interpretation in the **Dashboard** app.

    It is possible to format the text with **bold**, *italic* by using the
    Markdown style markers \* and \_ for **bold** and *italic* respectively.
    Keyboard shortcuts are also available: Ctrl/Cmd + B and Ctrl/Cmd + I. A
    limited set of smilies is supported and can be used by typing one of the
    following character combinations: :) :-) :( :-( :+1 :-1. URLs are
    automatically detected and converted into a clickable link.

3.  Search for a user group that you want to share your favorite with,
    then click the **+** icon.

4.  Change sharing settings for the user groups you want to modify.

      - **Can edit and view**: Everyone can view and edit the object.

      - **Can view only**: Everyone can view the object.

      - **None**: The public won't have access to the object. This
        setting is only applicable to **Public access**.

5.  Click **Share**.

### Subscribe to a favorite { #subscribe-to-a-favorite } 

When you are subscribed to a favorite, you receive internal messages
whenever another user likes/creates/updates an interpretation or
creates/update an interpretation comment of this favorite.

1.  Open a favorite.

2.  Click **\>\>\>** in the top right of the workspace.

3.  Click on the upper-right bell icon to subscribe to this favorite.

### Create a link to a favorite { #create-a-link-to-a-favorite } 

1.  Click **Favorites** \> **Get link**.

2.  Select one of the following:

      - **Open in this app**: You get a URL for the favorite which you
        can share with other users by email or chat.

      - **Open in web api**: You get a URL of the API resource. By
        default this is an HTML resource, but you can change the file
        extension to ".json" or ".csv".

### Delete a favorite { #delete-a-favorite } 

1.  Click **Favorites** \> **Delete**.

2.  Click **OK**.

### View interpretations based on relative periods { #view-interpretations-based-on-relative-periods } 

To view interpretations for relative periods, such as a year ago:

1.  Open a favorite with interpretations.

2.  Click **\>\>\>** in the top right of the workspace.

3.  Click an interpretation. Your chart displays the data and the date
    based on when the interpretation was created.To view other
    interpretations, click them.

## Visualize a chart as a pivot table { #visualize-a-chart-as-a-pivot-table } 

When you have made a chart you can open it as a pivot table:

Click **Chart** \> **Open this chart as table**.



# Messaging { #messages } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:messages-->

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:dashboard_messages-->

## About messages and feedback messages { #about-messages-and-feedback-messages } 

![](resources/images/messaging/view_inbox.png)

Within DHIS2 you can send messages and feedback messages to users, user
groups and organisation units. When you send a feedback message, it is
routed to a particular user group called the feedback recipient group.
If you are a member of this user group, you have access to feedback
handling tools. You can, for example, set the status of an incoming
feedback to "Pending" while you are waiting for information.

In addition to the user-to-user and feedback messages, depending on your
configuration the system will also send you system-generated messages.
These messages could be triggered by different events, including system
or background job failures and validation analysis results. Feedback
handling tools are also available for validation results and the
priority will be set to the importance of the validation rule violated.

To visit the app click **message icon in header bar** or find the
**Messaging** app in the app search box.

> **Note**
>
> Messages and feedback messages are not sent to users' e-mail
> addresses, the messages only appear within DHIS2.
>
> With 2.30 we introduced a new messaging app which offers a richer
> messaging experience. Specifically:
>
>   - Switch between list view and compact view by clicking the icon in
>     the top right corner.
>     - The list view is simplistic and gives a good
>     overview of all messages and is especially suited for feedback and
>     validation messages.
>     - The compact view is a modern way of view
>     messages where the user has more information in one view, hence
>     viewing and replying several messages is easier.
>
>     The first screenshot in this section displays list view, while the
>     screenshot in section **Read a message** displays the compact
>     view.
>
>   - A new search field is added which enables the user to search for
>     messages. The search filters messages on different message
>     attributes; subject, text and senders. This implies that you are
>     able to narrow down the message conversation list by entering a
>     search.
>
>   - A auto refresh feature is added so that the app fetches new
>     messages at a set interval, every 5 minutes. This feature is
>     disabled by default.
>
>   - For every message conversation you are able to add participants to
>     the conversation. This is very useful if you want input on that
>     particular conversation or if someone should also see the
>     information. It is not possible to delete participants from a
>     conversation.

## Create a message { #create-a-message } 

![](resources/images/messaging/create_private_message.png)

1.  Click **Compose**.

2.  Define who you want to receive the message. You can send a message
    to organisation units, users and user groups.

      - In the **To** field you can search for organisation units, users
        and user groups and select the wished recipients.

3.  Type a subject and a message.

4.  Click **Send**.

## Read a message { #read-a-message } 

![](resources/images/messaging/read_message.png)

1.  Select the appropriate message type to the left.

2.  Click a message.

    If the message is part of a conversation, you will see all messages in
    this conversation.

## Create a feedback message { #create-a-feedback-message } 

1.  Follow the steps as for creating a message, only selecting
    **Feedback message** instead of entering recipients.

2.  The message will be created as a feedback message and will appear in
    all of the specified users' **Ticket** folder.

## Attachments { #attachments } 

With 2.31 we introduced attachments to messages. When creating or
replying to a message conversation you have the possibility to add
attachments. Currently there are no limitations to type or size of the
file.

## Manage validation and feedback messages { #manage-validation-and-feedback-messages } 

> **Note**
>
> You will only see feedback messages and have access to the extended
> handling tools if you are a member of the user group that is set up to
> handle feedback messages.
>
> With the new app you manage extended tools for tickets and validation
> messages through the icon menu which appears when viewing a message or
> checking of messages in the conversation list.

### All messages selected { #all-messages-selected } 
![All Messages Selected](resources/images/messaging/view_validation_select_all.png)
### All messages selected and extended choice picker selected { #all-messages-selected-and-extended-choice-picker-selected } 
![All messages selected and extended choice picker selected](resources/images/messaging/view_validation_select_all_icon_menu.png)


You will receive feedback messages to your **Ticket** folder and
validation messages to your **Validation** folder. For feedback and
validation messages you have the following options in addition to the
messages options:

<table style="width:100%;">
<caption>Feedback handling tools</caption>
<colgroup>
<col width="23%" />
<col width="76%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Function</th>
<th>Description</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Priority</strong></p></td>
<td><p>You can mark a feedback/validation message with different priorities: <strong>None</strong>, <strong>Low</strong>, <strong>Medium</strong> or <strong>High</strong>.</p>
<p>Setting the priority makes it easier to keep track of which feedback message you need resolved first, and which feedback messages that can wait.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Status</strong></p></td>
<td><p>All feedback/validation messages get the status <strong>Open</strong> when created.</p>
<p>To keep track of existing feedback messages, you can change the status to <strong>Pending</strong>, <strong>Invalid</strong> or <strong>Solved</strong>.</p>
<p>You can filter feedback/validation messages based on their status with the two drop down menus in the internal header bar.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Assigned to</strong></p></td>
<td><p>You can assign a feedback message to any member of the user group that is set up to handle feedback messages.</p>
<p>You can assign a validation message to any user in the system.</p>
<p><strong>-</strong> means that you haven't assigned a user to the feedback message.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Internal reply</strong></p></td>
<td><p>When you work in a feedback handling team you might want to discuss the feedback before sending an answer to the sender. You can keep this discussion in the same message conversation as the feedback itself.</p>
<p>To send a reply that within the feedback handling user group, click <strong>INTERNAL REPLY</strong>.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## Configure feedback message function { #configure-feedback-message-function } 

To configure the feedback message function, you must:

1.  Create a user group (for example "Feedback message recipients") that
    contains all the users who should receive feedback messages.

2.  Open the **System Settings** app and click **General** \> **Feedback
    recipients** and select the user group you created in the previous
    step.


# Establecer las preferencias de la cuenta de usuario { #user_account_preferences } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:user_account_preferences-->

En **Configuración de usuario**, puede cambiar el idioma de visualización de DHIS2 y 
el idioma de la base de datos. El idioma de la base de datos es el contenido traducido 
de los metadatos, como los elementos de datos e indicadores. También puede 
elegir un estilo de visualización y habilitar o deshabilitar las notificaciones por SMS y 
correo electrónico. Si lo desea, puede elegir mostrar un nombre corto, 
como "Joe" en los módulos de análisis, en lugar de su nombre completo.

En **Perfil de usuario**, puede agregar información personal a su perfil,
como su dirección de correo electrónico, número de teléfono móvil, fecha de nacimiento, foto 
de perfil y más. Cuando envía mensajes, la persona que recibe el mensaje puede ver estos
detalles de perfil. También puede proporcionar nombres de cuentas para varios servicios de
mensajería directa, que serán utilizados por el sistema.

En **Configuración de la cuenta**, puede restablecer su contraseña y configurar la autenticación de 2 factores. 
La configuración de la autenticación  de 2 factores requerirá que 
descargue la aplicación Google Authenticator en su dispositivo móvil.

En la sección **Ver perfil completo** encontrará un resumen de los detalles de su perfil. 
Esta sección incluye algunos campos que no puede editar, 
como los roles de usuarios y usuarios de unidades organizativas.


En la sección **Acerca de DHIS2**, encontrará una lista de detalles sobre la instancia de DHIS2.

# Configure metadata { #maintenance_app } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:maintenance_app-->

## About the Maintenance app { #about_maintenance_app } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:about_maintenance_app-->

In the **Maintenance** app you configure all the metadata objects you
need to collect and analyze data:

  - Categorías 

  - Data elements

  - Data sets and data entry forms

  - Indicadores

  - Organisation units

  - Program metadata: tracked entity, tracked entity attribute and
    relationship type

  - Reglas de validación

  - Atributos

  - Constants

  - Options sets

  - Leyendas

  - Predictors

  - Push reports

  - External map layers

> **Note**
>
> The functions you have access to depend on your user role's access
> permissions.



### Navigating metadata objects { #navigating_metadata } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:navigating_metadata-->

Metadata objects are presented in a list with predefined columns that are relevant for each object.
You may customize which columns are shown in the list for the current object. These customizations are per user, and therefore will not affect other users. Note that these changes do not edit any metadata, just how the list is presented.

#### Managing visible columns { #managing-visible-columns } 

![](resources/images/maintainence/configurable_columns_dialog.png)

1. Click the ![settings-icon](resources/images/maintainence/icon_settings.png) -icon to the top right of the list of objects you want to configure.
2. A dropdown-menu will appear, select **Manage columns**.
3. A dialog will appear, with the default columns selected.
3. Click any column-name in the list of **Available columns** to add them to the list of selected columns.
4. You may reorder the selected columns by drag-and-dropping the ![reorder-icon](resources/images/maintainence/icon_reorder.png) -icon.
5. You may also remove any column from the view by clicking the X-icon next to the name.
6. Click **Save** once you are satisified with your changes.

You may easily reset to the default values by clicking the **Reset to default** button.

##### Download metadata { #download-metadata } 

You can download the metadata for the object you are currently viewing. The metadata download will respect any filters you have active for the list.

1. Click the ![settings-icon](resources/images/maintainence/icon_settings.png) -icon to the top right of the list of objects you want to configure.
2. A dropdown-menu will appear, select **Download**.
3. A dialog will appear, where you can select the desired format and compression.
4. **With sharing** can be selected to include sharing-data for the metadata.

## Manage categories { #manage_category } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:manage_category-->

### About categories { #about_category } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:about_category-->

Categories are typically a concept, for example "Gender", "Age" or
"Disease Status". Data elements such as "Number of cases of confirmed
malaria" are often broken into smaller component parts to determine, for
example, the number of confirmed malaria cases of particular age groups.

Use categories to disaggregate data elements into individual components.
You can also use categories to assign metadata attributes to all data
recorded in a specific dataset, such as "Implementing partner" or
"Funding agency."

Create three categories: "Under 1", "1-5" and "Over 5". Assign them as
categories to the data element. This creates three separate fields for
this data in the data entry forms:

  - Number of confirmed malaria cases (Under 1)

  - Number of confirmed malaria cases (1-5)

  - Number of confirmed malaria cases (Over 5)

Without categories, you would have had to create each of the data
elements listed above separately.

In the **Maintenance** app, you manage the following and category
objects:

<table>
<caption>Category objects in the Maintenance app</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Object type</p></th>
<th><p>Available functions</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Category option</p></td>
<td><p>Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Category</p></td>
<td><p>Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Category combination</p></td>
<td><p>Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Category option combination</p></td>
<td><p>Edit and show details</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Category option group</p></td>
<td><p>Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Category option group set</p></td>
<td><p>Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### Workflow { #workflow_category } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:workflow_category-->

1.  Create all category options.

2.  Create categories composed by the multiple category options you've
    created.

3.  Create category combinations composed by either one or multiple
    categories.

4.  Create data elements and assign them to a category combination.

### Create or edit a category option { #create_category_option } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_category_option-->

When possible, recycle category options. For instance, there might be
two categories which might share a particular category option (for
example \<1 year of age). When creating the categories, this category
option could be reused. This is important if particular category options
(or category option combinations) that need to be analyzed together.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Category** \> **Category
    option**.

2.  Click en el botón agregar.

3.  Fill in the form:

    1.  **Nombre**

    2.  **Start date**

    3.  **End date**

4.  Select organisation units and assign them.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > You can automatically select all organisation units that belong to
    > an organisation unit level or organisation unit group, for example
    > "Chiefdom" or "Urban. To do this:
    >
    > Select an **Organisation unit level** or **Organisation unit
    > group** and click **Select**.

5.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Create or edit a category { #create_category } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_category-->

When you have created all category options for a particular category,
you can create that category.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Category** \> **Category**.

2.  Click en el botón agregar.

3.  Fill in the form:

    1.  **Nombre**

    2.  **Code**

    3.  **Data dimension type**

        A category either be of type "Disaggregation" or "Attribute".
        For disaggregation of data elements, you select
        **Disaggregation**. The data dimension type "Attribute" allows
        the category to be used to assign a combination of categories to
        data recorded through a data set.

    4.  **Data dimension**

        If you select **Data dimension**, the category will be available
        to the analytics as another dimension, in addition to the
        standard dimensions of "Period" and "Organisation unit".

4.  Select category options and assign them.

5.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Create or edit a category combination { #create_category_combination } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_category_combination-->

Category combinations lets you combine multiple categories into a
related set.

You can disaggregate the data element "Number of new HIV infections"
into the following categories:

  - HIV Service: "Other", "PMTCT", "TB"

  - Gender: "Male", "Female"

In this example, there are two levels of disaggregation that consist of
two separate data element categories. Each data element category consist
of several data element category options.

In DHIS2, different data elements are disaggregated according to a
common set of categories. By combining these different categories into a
category combination and assigning these combinations to data elements,
you can apply the appropriate disaggregation levels quickly to a large
number of data elements.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Category** \> **Category
    combination**.

2.  Click en el botón agregar.

3.  Fill in the form:

    1.  **Nombre**

    2.  **Code**

    3.  **Data dimension type**

    4.  **Skip category total in reports**

4.  Select categories and assign them.

5.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Create or edit a category option group { #create_category_option_group } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_category_option_group-->

You can group and classify category options by using category option
groups. The main purpose of the category option group set is to add more
dimensionality to your captured data for analysis in for example the
**Pivot table** or **Data Visualizer** apps.

Consider a system where data is collected by "projects", and projects are modelled
as category options. The system must be able to analyse data based on
which donor supports the project. In this case, create a category
option group set called "Donor". Each donor can be created as a category
option group, where each category option / project is put in the
appropriate group. In the data analysis applications, the "Donor" group
set will appear as a data dimension, while each donor appear as
dimension items, ready to be included in reports.

To create a category option group:

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Category** \> **Category
    option group**.

2.  Click en el botón agregar.

3.  Fill in the form:

    1.  **Nombre**

    2.  **Short name**: Define a short name for the data element.

    3.  **Code**

    4.  **Data dimension type**

4.  Select **Category options** and assign them.

5.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Create or edit a category option group set { #create_category_option_group_set } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_category_option_group_set-->

You can group category option groups in category option group sets. The
main purpose of the category option group set is to add more
dimensionality to your captured data for analysis in for example the
**Pivot table** or **Data Visualizer** apps.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Category** \> **Category
    option group set**.

2.  Click en el botón agregar.

3.  Fill in the form:

    1.  **Nombre**

    2.  **Descripción**

    3.  **Data dimension**

    4.  **Data dimension type**

4.  Select **Category option groups** and assign them.

5.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Use category combinations for data sets { #use_category_combo_for_data_set } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:use_category_combo_for_data_set-->

When categories and category combinations have the data dimension type
"Attribute", they can apply a common set of attributes to a related set
of data values contained in a data set. When category combinations are
used as a attribute, they serve as another dimension (similar to
"Period" and "Organisation unit") which you can use in your analysis.

Suppose that a NGO is providing ART services in a given facility. They
would need to report each month on the "ART monthly summary", which
would contain a number of data elements. The NGO and project could
potentially change over time. In order to attribute data to a given NGO
and project at any point in time, you need to record this information
with each data value at the time of data entry.

1.  Create two categories with the data dimension type "Attribute":
    "Implementing partner" and "Projects".

2.  Create a category combination with the data dimension type
    "Attribute": "Implementing partners and projects".

3.  Assign the categories you've created to the category combination.

4.  Create a data set called "ART monthly summary" and select the
    "Implementing partners and projects" category combination.

When you enter data in the **Data entry** app, you can select an
"Implementing partner" and a "Project". Each recorded data value, is
assigned a specific combination of these categories as an attribute.
These attributes (when specified as a dimension) can be used in the
analysis applications similar to other dimensions, for example the
period and organisation unit.

![](resources/images/maintainence/categories_dataset_attributes.png)

### Assign a code to a category option combination { #assign_code_category_option_combo } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:assign_code_category_option_combo-->

You can assign a code to category option combinations. This makes data
exchange between DHIS2 and external systems easier. The system creates
the category option combinations automatically.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Category** \> **Category
    option combination**.

2.  In the list, find the object you want to modify.

3.  Click the options menu and select **Edit**.

4.  Enter a code.

5.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Clone metadata objects { #clone_metadata } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:clone_metadata-->

Cloning a data element or other objects can save time when you create
many similar objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to clone.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Clone**.

3.  Modify the options you want.

4.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Change sharing settings for metadata objects { #change-sharing-settings-for-metadata-objects } 

You can assign different sharing settings to metadata objects, for
example organisation units and tracked entity attributes. These sharing
settings control which users and users groups that can view or edit a
metadata object.

Some metadata objects also allows you to change the sharing setting of
data entry for the object. These additional settings control who can
view or enter data in form fields using the metadata.

> **Note**
>
> The default setting is that everyone (**Public access**) can find,
> view and edit metadata objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to modify.

2.  In the object list, click the context menu and select **Sharing
    settings**.

3.  (Optional) Add users or user groups: search for a user or a user
    group and select it. The user or user group is added to the list.

4.  Change sharing settings for the access groups you want to modify.

      - **Can edit and view**: The access group can view and edit the
        object.

      - **Can view only**: The access group can view the object.

      - **No access** (only applicable to **Public access**): The public
        won't have access to the object.

5.  Change data sharing settings for the access groups you want to
    modify.

      - **Can capture data**: The access group can view and capture data
        for the object.

      - **Can view data**: The access group can view data for the
        object.

      - **No access**: The access group won't have access to data for
        the object.

6.  Click en **Cerrar**.

### Delete metadata objects { #delete-metadata-objects } 

> **Note**
>
> You can only delete a data element and other data element objects if
> no data is associated to the data element itself.

> **Warning**
>
> Any data set that you delete from the system is irrevocably lost. All
> data entry forms, and section forms which may have been developed will
> also be removed. Make sure that you have made a backup of your
> database before deleting any data set in case you need to restore it
> at some point in time.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to delete.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Delete**.

3.  Click en **Confirmar**.

### Display details of metadata objects { #display-details-of-metadata-objects } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to view.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Show
    details**.

### Translate metadata objects { #translate-metadata-objects } 

DHIS2 provides functionality for translations of database content, for
example data elements, data element groups, indicators, indicator groups
or organisation units. You can translate these elements to any number of
locales. A locale represents a specific geographical, political, or
cultural region.

> **Tip**
>
> To activate a translation, open the **System Settings** app, click \>
> **Appearance** and select a language.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to translate.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Translate**.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > If you want to translate an organisation unit level, click
    > directly on the **Translate** icon next to each list item.

3.  Select a locale.

4.  Type a **Name**, **Short name** and **Description**.

5.  Click en **Guardar**.

## Manage data elements { #manage_data_element } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:manage_data_element-->

### About data elements { #about_data_element } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:about_data_element-->

Data elements are the base of DHIS2. Data elements define what is
actually recorded in the system, for example number of immunisations or
number of cases of malaria.

Data elements such as "Number of cases of confirmed malaria" are often
broken into smaller component parts to determine, for example, the
number of confirmed malaria cases of particular age groups.

In the **Maintenance** app, you manage the following data elements
objects:

<table>
<caption>Data element objects in the Maintenance app</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Object type</p></th>
<th><p>Available functions</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Data element</p></td>
<td><p>Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Data element group</p></td>
<td><p>Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Data element group set</p></td>
<td><p>Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### Workflow { #workflow_data_element } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:workflow_data_element-->

1.  Create all category options.

2.  Create categories composed by the multiple category options you've
    created.

3.  Create category combinations composed by either one or multiple
    categories.

4.  Create data elements and assign them to a category combination.

### Create or edit a data element { #create_data_element } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_data_element-->

![](resources/images/maintainence/create_data_element.png)

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Data elements** \> **Data
    element**.

2.  Click en el botón agregar.

3.  In the **Name** field, define the precise name of the data element.

    Each data element must have a unique name.

4.  In the **Short name** field, define a short name for the data
    element.

    Typically, the short name is an abbreviation of the full data
    element name. This attribute is often used in reports to display the
    name of the data element, where space is limited.

5.  (Optional) In the **Code** field, assign a code.

    In many countries data elements are assigned a code.

6.  (Optional) In the **Color** field, assign a color which will be used
    for this data element in the data capture apps.

7.  (Optional) In the **Icon** field, assign an icon which will be used
    for this data element in the data capture apps.

8.  In the **Description** field, type a description of the data
    element. Be as precise as possible and include complete information
    about how the data element is measured and what its purpose is.

8. (Optional) In the **Field mask** field, you may type a template that's used to provide
   hints for correct formatting of the data element. 

     > **NOTE**
     >
     > So far this is only implemented in the DHIS2 Android Capture app; not in the Capture and Tracker Capture web apps.

   The following are special characters that can be used in the mask. The special characters match exactly one character of the given type.

   | Character     |    Match       |
   | ------------- |----------------|
   |      \\d      |     digit      |
   |      \\x      |lower case letter|
   |      \\X      | capital letter |
   |      \\w      |any alphanumeric character|

   For example, the pattern can be used to show hyphens as needed in the input field of the data element. E.g "\d\d\d-\d\d\d-\d\d\d, would 
   show a hyphen for every third digit.

9.  In the **Form name** field, type an alternative name of the data
    element. This name can be used in either section or automatic data
    entry forms. The form name is applied automatically.

10. In the **Domain type** field, select whether the data element is an
    aggregate or tracker type of data element.

11. In the **Value type** field, select the type of data that the data
    element will record.

    <table>
    <caption>Value types</caption>
    <colgroup>
    <col style="width: 53%" />
    <col style="width: 46%" />
    </colgroup>
    <thead>
    <tr class="header">
    <th><p>Value type</p></th>
    <th><p>Description</p></th>
    </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>Age</p></td>
    <td><p>-</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p>Coordinate</p></td>
    <td><p>A point coordinate specified as longitude and latitude in decimal degrees. All coordinate should be specified in the format &quot;-19.23 , 56.42&quot; with a comma separating the longitude and latitude.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>Date</p></td>
    <td><p>Dates rendered as calendar widget in data entry.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p>Date &amp; time</p></td>
    <td><p>Is a combination of the <strong>DATE</strong> and <strong>TIME</strong> data elements.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>Email</p></td>
    <td><p>Email.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p>File</p></td>
    <td><p>A file resource where you can store external files, for example documents and photos.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>Image</p></td>
    <td><p>A file resource where you can store photos.</p>
    <p>Unlike the <strong>FILE</strong> data element, the <strong>IMAGE</strong> data element can display the uploaded image directly in forms.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p>Integer</p></td>
    <td><p>Any whole number (positive and negative), including zero.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>Letter</p></td>
    <td><p>A single letter.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p>Long text</p></td>
    <td><p>Textual value. Renders as text area with no length constraint in forms.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>Negative integer</p></td>
    <td><p>Any whole number less than (but not including) zero.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p>Number</p></td>
    <td><p>Any real numeric value with a single decimal point. Thousands separators and scientific notation is not supported.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>Percentage</p></td>
    <td><p>Whole numbers inclusive between 0 and 100.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p>Phone number</p></td>
    <td><p>Phone number.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>Positive integer</p></td>
    <td><p>Any whole number greater than (but not including) zero.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p>Positive of zero integer</p></td>
    <td><p>Any positive whole number, including zero.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>Organisation unit</p></td>
    <td><p>Organisation units rendered as a hierarchy tree widget.</p>
    <p>If the user has assigned &quot;search organisation units&quot;, these will be displayed instead of the assigned organisation units.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p>Unit interval</p></td>
    <td><p>Any real number greater than or equal to 0 and less than or equal to 1.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>Text</p></td>
    <td><p>Textual value. The maximum number of allowed characters per value is 50,000.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p>Time</p></td>
    <td><p>Time is stored in HH:mm format.</p>
    <p>HH is a number between 0 and 23</p>
    <p>mm is a number between 00 and 59</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>Tracker associate</p></td>
    <td><p>Tracked entity instance. Rendered as dialog with a list of tracked entity instances and a search field.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p>Username</p></td>
    <td><p>DHIS2 user. Rendered as a dialog with a list of users and a search field.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>Yes/No</p></td>
    <td><p>Boolean values, renders as drop-down lists in data entry.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p>Yes only</p></td>
    <td><p>True values, renders as check-boxes in data entry.</p></td>
    </tr>
    </tbody>
    </table>

12. In the **Aggregation type** field, select the default aggregation
    operation that will be used on the data element.

    Most data elements should have the **Sum** operator. This includes
    all data elements which should be added together. Other data
    elements, such as staffing levels, should be set to use the
    **Average** operator, when values along the time dimension should
    not be added together, but rather averaged.

    <table>
    <caption>Aggregation operators</caption>
    <colgroup>
    <col style="width: 50%" />
    <col style="width: 50%" />
    </colgroup>
    <thead>
    <tr class="header">
    <th><p>Aggregation operator</p></th>
    <th><p>Description</p></th>
    </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>Average</p></td>
    <td><p>Average the values in both the period as and the organisation unit dimensions.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p>Average (sum in organisation unit hierarchy)</p></td>
    <td><p>Average of data values in the period dimension, sum in the organisation unit dimensions.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>Count</p></td>
    <td><p>Count of data values.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p>Min</p></td>
    <td><p>Minimum of data values.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>Max</p></td>
    <td><p>Maximum of data values.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p>None</p></td>
    <td><p>No aggregation is performed in any dimension.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>Sum</p></td>
    <td><p>Sum of data values in the period and organisation unit dimension.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p>Standard deviation</p></td>
    <td><p>Standard deviation (population-based) of data values.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p>Variance</p></td>
    <td><p>Variance (population-based) of data values.</p></td>
    </tr>
    </tbody>
    </table>

13. If you want to save zeros for a particular reason, select **Store
    zero data values**. By default, DHIS2 does not store zeros entered
    in the data entry module.

14. In the **URL** field, enter a link to an in-depth description of the
    data element.

    For example a link to a metadata repository or registry that
    contains detailed technical information about the definition and
    measurement of the data element.

15. In the **Category combination** field, define which category
    combination the data element should have. This is also known as the
    "disaggregation".

16. Select an **Option set**.

    Option sets are predefined lists of options which can be used in
    data entry.

17. Select an **Option set for comments**.

    Option sets for comments are predefined lists of options which can
    be used to specify standardized comments for data values in data
    entry.

18. Assign one or multiple **Legends**.

    Legends are used in for example the **Maps** app to display certain
    data elements with certain icons.

19. Set the **Aggregation levels** to allow the data element to be
    aggregated at one or more levels:

    1.  In the left pane, select the levels you want to assign to the
        data element.

    2.  Click the right arrow to assign the aggregation levels.

    By default, the aggregation will start at the lowest assigned
    organisation unit. If you for example select "Chiefdom", it means
    that "Chiefdom", "District", and "National" aggregates use
    "Chiefdom" (the highest aggregation level available) as the data
    source, and PHU data will not be included. PHU data will still be
    available for the PHU level, but not included in aggregations to the
    levels above.

    If you select both "District" and "Chiefdom", it means that the
    "District" and "National" level aggregates use District data as
    their source, "Chiefdom" will use Chiefdom, and "PHU" will use PHU.

20. If applicable, enter custom attributes values, for example
    **Classification** or **Collection method**.

    > **Note**
    >
    > You create custom attributes in the **Maintenance** app: **Other**
    > \> **Attributes**.

21. If applicable, select compulsory data element group sets, for
    example **Main data element group** or **Tracker-based data**.

    > **Note**
    >
    > You'll only see data element group sets in this form if you've
    > created them and set them to **Compulsory**.
    >
    > You create data element group sets in the **Maintenance** app:
    > **Data element** \> **Date element group set**.

22. Click en **Guardar**.

### Create or edit a data element group { #create_data_element_group } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_data_element_group-->

Data element groups lets you classify related data elements into a
common theme. For example, two data elements "Measles immunisation" and
"BCG Immunisation" might be grouped together into a data element group
"Childhood immunisation".

To create a data element group:

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Data elements** \> **Data
    element group**.

2.  Click en el botón agregar.

3.  Fill in the form:

    1.  **Nombre**

    2.  **Short name**

    3.  **Code**

4.  Select data elements and assign them.

5.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Create or edit a data element group set { #create_data_element_group_set } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_data_element_group_set-->

Data element group sets allows you to categorise multiple data element
groups into a set. The system uses data element group sets during
analysis and reporting to combine similar data element groups into a
common theme. A data element group can be part of multiple data element
group sets.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Data elements** \> **Data
    element group set**.

2.  Click en el botón agregar.

3.  Fill in the form:

    1.  **Nombre**

    2.  **Code**

    3.  **Descripción**

    4.  **Compulsory**

    5.  **Data dimension**

4.  Select data element groups and assign them.

    Available data element groups are displayed in the left panel. Data
    element groups that are currently members of the data element group
    set are displayed in the right hand panel.

5.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Clone metadata objects { #clone_metadata } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:clone_metadata-->

Cloning a data element or other objects can save time when you create
many similar objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to clone.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Clone**.

3.  Modify the options you want.

4.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Change sharing settings for metadata objects { #change-sharing-settings-for-metadata-objects } 

You can assign different sharing settings to metadata objects, for
example organisation units and tracked entity attributes. These sharing
settings control which users and users groups that can view or edit a
metadata object.

Some metadata objects also allows you to change the sharing setting of
data entry for the object. These additional settings control who can
view or enter data in form fields using the metadata.

> **Note**
>
> The default setting is that everyone (**Public access**) can find,
> view and edit metadata objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to modify.

2.  In the object list, click the context menu and select **Sharing
    settings**.

3.  (Optional) Add users or user groups: search for a user or a user
    group and select it. The user or user group is added to the list.

4.  Change sharing settings for the access groups you want to modify.

      - **Can edit and view**: The access group can view and edit the
        object.

      - **Can view only**: The access group can view the object.

      - **No access** (only applicable to **Public access**): The public
        won't have access to the object.

5.  Change data sharing settings for the access groups you want to
    modify.

      - **Can capture data**: The access group can view and capture data
        for the object.

      - **Can view data**: The access group can view data for the
        object.

      - **No access**: The access group won't have access to data for
        the object.

6.  Click en **Cerrar**.

### Delete metadata objects { #delete-metadata-objects } 

> **Note**
>
> You can only delete a data element and other data element objects if
> no data is associated to the data element itself.

> **Warning**
>
> Any data set that you delete from the system is irrevocably lost. All
> data entry forms, and section forms which may have been developed will
> also be removed. Make sure that you have made a backup of your
> database before deleting any data set in case you need to restore it
> at some point in time.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to delete.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Delete**.

3.  Click en **Confirmar**.

### Display details of metadata objects { #display-details-of-metadata-objects } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to view.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Show
    details**.

### Translate metadata objects { #translate-metadata-objects } 

DHIS2 provides functionality for translations of database content, for
example data elements, data element groups, indicators, indicator groups
or organisation units. You can translate these elements to any number of
locales. A locale represents a specific geographical, political, or
cultural region.

> **Tip**
>
> To activate a translation, open the **System Settings** app, click \>
> **Appearance** and select a language.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to translate.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Translate**.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > If you want to translate an organisation unit level, click
    > directly on the **Translate** icon next to each list item.

3.  Select a locale.

4.  Type a **Name**, **Short name** and **Description**.

5.  Click en **Guardar**.

## Manage data sets and data entry forms { #manage_data_set } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:manage_data_set-->

### About data sets and data entry forms { #about_dataset_dataform } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:about_dataset_dataform-->

All data entry in DHIS2 is organised in data sets. A data set is a
collection of data elements grouped together for data entry and data
export between instances of DHIS2. To use a data set to collect data for
a specific organisation unit, you must assign the organisation unit to
the data set. Once you have assigned the data set to an organisation
unit, that data set is available in the **Data entry** app. Only the
organisation units that you have assigned the data set to can use the
data set for data entry.

A category combination can link to both data elements and data sets. If
you use a category combination for a data set, the category combinations
is applicable for the whole form. This means that you can use categories
to capture information which is common to an entire form, for example
the name of the a project or grant. When a data set is linked to a
category combination, those categories will be displayed as drop-down
boxes in the **Data entry** app. Data captured in the form will then be
linked to the selected category options from those drop-down boxes. For
information about how to create categories and category combinations,
see section "Manage data elements and categories". Make sure that you
set the type of categories and category combinations to "Attribute".

An scenario for when categories are useful is when you need to capture a
data entry form for a implementing partner organisation and a project.
In that case:

1.  Create category options and categories for all partner organisations
    and projects and link them in a new category combination.

2.  Assign the category combination to the data set (form) for which you
    need to capture this information.

    When opening this data set in data entry module, the partner
    organisation and project categories will automatically be rendered
    as drop-down boxes, allowing you to select a specific implementing
    partner organisation and project before continuing to do data entry.

You create and edit data sets in the **Maintenance** app. Here you
define, for example, which data elements you want to include in the data
set and the data collection frequency.

You enter data in the **Data entry** app. The **Data entry** app uses
data entry forms to display the data sets. There are three types of data
entry forms:

<table>
<caption>Data entry form types</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 37%" />
<col style="width: 62%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Data entry form type</th>
<th>Description</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Default form</p></td>
<td><p>Once you have assigned a data set to an organisation unit, a default form is created automatically. The default form is then available in the <strong>Data entry</strong> app for the organisation units you have assigned it to.</p>
<p>A default form consist of a list of the data elements belonging to the data set together with a column for inputting the values. If your data set contains data elements with a non-default category combination, for example age groups or gender, additional columns are automatically created in the default form based on the different categories.</p>
<p>If you use more than one category combination you get multiple columns in the default form with different column headings for the options.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Section form</p></td>
<td><p>If the default form doesn't meet your needs, you can modify it to create a section form. Section forms give you more flexibility when it comes to using tabular forms.</p>
<p>In a section form you can, for example, create multiple tables with subheadings and disable (grey out) cells in a table.</p>
<p>When you have added a section form to a data set, the section form is available in the <strong>Data entry</strong> app.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Custom form</p></td>
<td><p>If the form you want to design is too complicated for default or section forms, you can create a custom form. A custom form takes more time to create than a section form, but you have full control over the design.</p>
<p>You can, for example, mimic an existing paper aggregation form with a custom form. This makes data entry easier, and should reduce the number incorrectly entered data elements.</p>
<p>When you have added a custom form to a data set, the custom form is available in the <strong>Data entry</strong> app.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

> **Note**
>
> If a data set has both a section form and a custom form, the system
> displays the custom form during data entry. Users who enter data can't
> select which form they want to use. In web-based data entry the order
> of display preference is:
>
> 1.  Custom form (if it exists)
>
> 2.  Section form (if it exists)
>
> 3.  Default form
>
> Mobile devices do not support custom forms. In mobile-based data entry
> the order of display preference is:
>
> 1.  Section form (if it exists)
>
> 2.  Default form

In the **Maintenance** app, you manage the following data set objects:

<table>
<caption>Data set objects in the Maintenance app</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Object type</p></th>
<th><p>Available functions</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Data set</p></td>
<td><p>Create, assign to organisation units, edit, share, delete, show details and translate</p>
<p>Edit compulsory data elements</p>
<p>Add and remove multiple data sets to organisation units at once</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Section form</p></td>
<td><p>Create, edit and manage grey fields</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Section</p></td>
<td><p>Change display order, delete and translate</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Custom form</p></td>
<td><p>Create, edit and script</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### Workflow { #workflow_data_set } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:workflow_data_set-->

You need to have data elements and categories to create data sets and
data entry forms.

1.  Create a data set.

2.  Assign the data set to organisation units.

    A default form is created automatically.

3.  Create a section form or a custom form.

    Now you can register data in the **Data entry** app.

### Create or edit a data set { #create_data_set } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_data_set-->

![](resources/images/datasets/data_set_create.png)

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Data set** \> **Data set**.

2.  Click en el botón agregar.

3.  In the **Name** field, type the precise name of the data set.

4.  In the **Short name** field, define a short name for the data set.

    Typically, the short name is an abbreviation of the full data set
    name. This attribute is often used to display the name of the data
    set where space is limited.

5.  (Optional) In the **Code** field, assign a code.

6.  In the **Description** field, type a description of the data set.

7.  Enter the number of **Expiry days**.

    The number of expiry days controls for how long it should be
    possible to enter data in the **Data entry** app for this data set.
    Expiry days refer to the number of days after the end date of the
    selected data entry period where the data entry form should be open
    for entry. After the number of days has expired, the data set will
    be locked for further entry.

    You can set manual exceptions to this using the lock exception
    functionality in the **Data Administration** app.

    > **Note**
    >
    > To allow data entry into all possible historical time periods, set
    > the number of expiry days to zero.

8.  If you want it to be possible to enter data for future periods, type
    the number of periods in the **Open future periods for data entry**
    field.

    The value is the number of future periods which are available for
    data entry.

    For a monthly data set a value of 2 allows you to enter data for 2
    months in advance. This is useful for, by example, population,
    target and planning data.

9.  In the **Days after period to qualify for timely submission** field,
    type the number of days in which data can be entered to be
    considered reported on time.

    To verify the number of timely reports submitted, go to **Reports**
    \> **Reporting rate summary**.

10. Select a **Period type**.

    The period type defines the frequency of reporting for the
    particular data set. The frequency can for example be daily,
    quarterly or yearly.

11. Select a **Category combination** to assign it to the data set.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > Click **Add new** to create category combinations that you're
    > missing. In the form that opens, create the category combinations
    > you need. When you're done, click **Refresh values**.

12. In the **Complete notification recipients** list, select a user
    group that should receive a message when the data set is marked as
    complete in the **Data Entry** app.

    The message is delivered through the DHIS2 messaging system.

13. If you want the user who entered the data to receive a message when
    the data set is marked as complete in the **Data entry** app, select
    **Send notification to completing user**.

    The message is delivered through the DHIS2 messaging system.

14. If applicable, select, a **Data approval workflow**.

15. If you want it to be possible to use the data set within the Java
    mobile DHIS2 application, select **Enable for Java mobile client**.

16. If you want it to be mandatory to fill all values for a data element
    in data entry if one or more values have been filled, select **All
    fields for data elements required**.

    This means that if you enter one data value for a data element in an
    entry field (that is for a category option combination), then you
    must enter data for all fields belonging to that data element (that
    is all category option combinations).

17. If you want it to be possible to mark a data entry form as complete
    only if the validation of that form is successful, select **Complete
    allowed only if validation passes**.

    If you select this option, you can't mark the form as complete if
    validation fails.

18. If you want it to be mandatory that any missing values require a
    comment to justify their absence, select **Missing values requires
    comment on complete**.

19. (Optional) Assign one or multiple **Legends**.

20. If applicable, select **Skip offline**.

    This option controls whether this data entry form should be
    downloaded and saved in the user's web browser. Normally you
    shouldn't select **Skip offline**. This is the default setting. If
    you have big forms which are rarely used you can consider selecting
    this option to speed up initial loading in the data entry module.

21. If applicable, select **Data element decoration**

    If you select this option, descriptions of data elements render in
    call-outs in downloaded data sets in offline mode in the **Data
    entry** app.

22. If applicable, select **Render sections as tabs**.

    This option is only applicable for section forms. The option allows
    you to render each section as a tab horizontally above the data set.
    This is useful for long data sets as it allows appropriate sections
    to be selected quickly without going through the entire form.

23. If applicable, select **Render vertically**.

    This option is only applicable for section forms.

24. Select data elements and assign them.

    You can override the category combination for each selected data set
    by clicking on the gear icon above the list of selected data
    elements. This allows you to utilize a specific category combination
    (disaggregation) within the current data set instead of the category
    combination associated directly with the data element itself.

25. Select indicators and assign them.

26. In the organisation unit tree, select the organisation units you
    want to assign the data set to.

    > **Tip**
    >
    >   - Click **Organisation unit level** to select all organisation
    >     units that belong to a certain organisation level.
    >
    >   - Click **Organisation unit group** to select all organisation
    >     units that belong to a certain organisation unit group.

27. Click en **Guardar**.

You can now use the data set in the **Data Entry** app for the
organisation units that you have assigned to and for periods according
to the selected frequency (period type).

### Create or edit Data set Notification { #create_data_set_notification } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_data_set_notification-->

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Data set** \> **Data set
    notification**.

2.  Click en el botón agregar.

#### What to send? { #what-to-send } 

![](resources/images/datasets/dataset_notification_create.png)

1.  In the **Name** field, type the precise name of the data set
    notification.

2.  (Optional) In the **Code** field, assign a code.

3.  Enter **Data sets**.

    These data sets will be associated to this notification. In case any
    of them is completed for a certain period and organisation unit,
    notification will be generated by the system.

    > **Note**
    >
    > Nothing will happen if no data set is selected

4.  In **Message template** section there are two parameters.

      - **Subject template** subject of the notification sent in
        notification. It can have values from the list of variables
        available on the right side.

      - **Message template** actual message sent in notification. It can
        have values from the list of variables available on the right
        side.

    > **Note**
    >
    > Subject is only relevant in case of Email and internal DHIS2
    > messages. It is ignored in case of SMS.

#### When to send? { #when-to-send } 

![](resources/images/datasets/when_to_send.png)

1.  **Data set notification trigger** field determine when to send
    notification.

      - **Data Set Completion** will trigger notification as soon as
        data set is completed.

      - **Schedule Days** will schedule notification based on number days
        relative to scheduled date. Schedule date will be decided by
        Period associated with Data set.

          - **Send notification as** provides two different types of
            notifications

              - **Collective summary** send notification in summary mood

              - **Single notification** sends notification in single
                mood

    > **Note**
    >
    > **Send notification as** option is only available in case of
    > scheduled notification. This option is set to default which is
    > **Single notification** in case of completion notification

#### Who to send? { #who-to-send } 

![](resources/images/datasets/who_to_send.png)

1.  **Notification recipient** field determine recipients of the
    notification.

      - **Organisation Unit contact** will send notification to contact
        assigned to organisation unit which the data has been collected
        from.

      - **UserGroup** will send notification to all the member of the
        selected UserGroup.

    > **Note**
    >
    > An internal DHIS2 message will be sent in case if recipient is
    > UserGroup. Moreover user will also receive SMS/EMAIL if phone
    > number and email address exist for that user and SMS/EMAIL
    > notifications are enabled in SystemSettings

### Override data elements' category combinations in a data set { #override_dataelement_catcombo_in_dataset } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:override_dataelement_catcombo_in_dataset-->

You can override which category combination to use for a data element
within the context of a data set. This means that a data element can use
different category combinations within different data sets. This is
useful when you want to reuse a data element since you don't have to
replicate the data element to allow multiple category combinations.

If different regions within your organisation unit hierarchy use
different disaggregations, or if the disaggregations change over time,
you can represent this by creating different data sets with the
appropriate category combinations.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Data set** \> **Data set**.

2.  In the list, find the data set you want to modify.

3.  Click the options menu and select **Edit**.

4.  Go to the data elements section and click the spanner icon.

5.  Select new category combinations and click **Close**.

6.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Edit compulsory data elements in a data set { #edit_compulsory_dataelement_in_dataset } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:edit_compulsory_dataelement_in_dataset-->

You can add or remove data elements which will be marked as compulsory
during data entry.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Data set** \> **Data set**.

2.  In the list, find the data set you want to edit.

3.  Click the options menu and select **Edit compulsory data elements**.

4.  Assign the compulsory data elements.

5.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Download default data forms in PDF format { #download_defaultform_pdf } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:download_defaultform_pdf-->

You can download a default data from in PDF format for offline data
entry.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Data set** \> **Data set**.

2.  In the list, find the object you want to download.

3.  Click the options menu and select **Get PDF for data entry**.

### Manage section forms { #manage_section_form } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:manage_section_form-->

#### Create a section form { #create-a-section-form } 

Section forms are separated automatically by data element category
combinations, which produce a spreadsheet like data entry form for each
section.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Data set** \> **Data set**.

2.  In the list, find the data set you want to create a section form
    for.

3.  Click the options menu and select **Manage sections**.

4.  Click en el botón agregar.

5.  (Optional) In the **Name** field, type the name of the section.

6.  (Optional) In the **Description** field, type a description of the
    section.

7.  (Optional) To display totals for rows in the section form during
    data entry, select **Show row totals**.

8.  (Optional) To display totals for columns in the section form during
    data entry, select **Show column totals**.

9.  Assign data elements to the section:

    1.  (Optional) Select a **Category combination filter**.

        > **Note**
        >
        > You can only use one category combination per section.

        <table>
        <colgroup>
        <col style="width: 50%" />
        <col style="width: 50%" />
        </colgroup>
        <thead>
        <tr class="header">
        <th><p>Option</p></th>
        <th><p>Description</p></th>
        </tr>
        </thead>
        <tbody>
        <tr class="odd">
        <td><p><strong>None</strong></p></td>
        <td><p>Displays all data elements that don't have a category combination.</p></td>
        </tr>
        <tr class="even">
        <td><p><strong>&lt;No filter&gt;</strong></p></td>
        <td><p>Displays all data elements.</p></td>
        </tr>
        </tbody>
        </table>

    2.  Select data elements and assign them.

10. (Optional) Sort the data elements within the section by using the up
    and down arrows to the left of the assigned data elements field.

11. Click en **Guardar**.

12. Repeat add section steps for each section you want to have in your
    section form.

    In the **Data Entry** app you can now use the section form. The
    section form appears automatically when sections are available for
    the selected data set. Data sets which have section forms will
    automatically display the section form.

Note how each data element category has been separated into a separate
section, and a data entry table has been automatically generated by the
system. Use of section forms in combination with data element categories
can drastically reduce the amount of time which is required to create
data entry forms for data sets.


![](resources/images/dhis2UserManual/section_form.png)

#### Edit a section form { #edit-a-section-form } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Data set** \> **Data set**.

2.  In the list, find the data set you want to edit the section form
    for.

3.  Click the options menu and select **Manage sections**.

4.  In the list, find the section you want to edit.

5.  Click the options menu and select **Edit**.

6.  Edit the section and click **Save**.

7.  Repeat edit section steps for each section you want to edit.

#### Manage grey fields in a section form { #manage-grey-fields-in-a-section-form } 

You can disable data elements and category options for data entry. That
means it won’t be possible to enter data into these fields during data
entry.

![](resources/images/datasets/section_form_grey_fields.png)

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Data set** \> **Data set**.

2.  In the list, find the data set you want to edit the section form
    for.

3.  Click the options menu and select **Manage sections**.

4.  In the list, find the section you want to edit.

5.  Click the options menu and select **Manage grey fields**.

6.  Select which fields you want to disable.

    > **Note**
    >
    > If you've sections that contain data elements assigned to multiple
    > category combinations, switch between the category combinations to
    > view all fields.

7.  Click en **Guardar**.

#### Change section display order in a section form { #change-section-display-order-in-a-section-form } 

You can control in which order sections are displayed in a section form.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Data set** \> **Data set**.

2.  In the list, find the data set you want to edit the section form
    for.

3.  Click the options menu and select **Manage sections**.

4.  In the list, find the section you want to move.

5.  Click the options menu and select **Move up** or **Move down**.

    If the section you want to move is the first or last section in the
    list, you'll only see one of the move options.

#### Delete a section in a section form { #delete-a-section-in-a-section-form } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Data set** \> **Data set**.

2.  In the list, find the data set you want to edit the section form
    for.

3.  Click the options menu and select **Manage sections**.

4.  In the list, find the section you want to delete.

5.  Click the options menu and select **Delete**.

#### Translate a section in a section form { #translate-a-section-in-a-section-form } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Data set** \> **Data set**.

2.  In the list, find the data set you want to edit the section form
    for.

3.  Click the options menu and select **Translate**.

4.  Select a locale.

5.  Enter the required information.

6.  Click en **Cerrar**.

### Manage custom forms { #manage_customform } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:manage_customform-->

#### Create a custom form { #create-a-custom-form } 

You design custom forms in a built-in WYSIWYG HTML editor. If you select
**Source**, you can paste HTML code directly in the editing area. For a
complete guide on how to use the editor, refer to
<http://docs.ckeditor.com/>.


![](resources/images/datasets/data_set_custom_form_create.png)

To create a custom form:

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Data set**.

2.  In the list, find the data set you want to add a custom form to.

3.  Click the options menu and select **Design data entry form**.

4.  In the editing area, create the custom form.

      - Double-click on a object in the left-hand list to insert it in
        the form.

      - If you already have the HTML code for your form, click
        **Source** and paste the code.

5.  Select a **Form display style**.

6.  Click en **Guardar**.

#### Scripting in custom forms { #scripting-in-custom-forms } 

In custom data entry form you can use JavaScript to create dynamic
behaviour and customizations. As an example, you can hide form sections
based on specific user input for data elements, or show specific
information when a form loads.

##### Events { #events } 

The DHIS2 data entry module provides a range of events which you can
register for and use to perform actions at certain times. The events are
registered on the document element. The jQuery event object and the data
set identifier are always the first two arguments provided to the
callback functions. The table below provides an overview of the events
and when they are triggered.

<table>
<caption>Data entry events</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 32%" />
<col style="width: 39%" />
<col style="width: 27%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Key</th>
<th>Description</th>
<th>Arguments</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>dhis2.de.event.formLoaded</p></td>
<td><p>Triggered after the data entry form is rendered, but before data values are set in entry fields.</p></td>
<td><p>Event | Data set ID</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>dhis2.de.event.dataValuesLoaded</p></td>
<td><p>Triggered after data values are set in entry fields.</p></td>
<td><p>Event | Data set ID</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>dhis2.de.event.formReady</p></td>
<td><p>Triggered when the data entry form is completely rendered and loaded with all elements.</p></td>
<td><p>Event | Data set ID</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>dhis2.de.event.dataValueSaved</p></td>
<td><p>Triggered when a data value is saved successfully.</p></td>
<td><p>Event | Data set ID | Data value object</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>dhis2.de.event.completed</p></td>
<td><p>Triggered when a data set is successfully marked as complete.</p></td>
<td><p>Event | Data set ID | Complete registration object</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>dhis2.de.event.uncompleted</p></td>
<td><p>Triggered when a data set is successfully marked as incomplete.</p></td>
<td><p>Event | Data set ID</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>dhis2.de.event.validationSuccess</p></td>
<td><p>Triggered when validation is done and there were no violations.</p></td>
<td><p>Event | Data set ID</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>dhis2.de.event.validationError</p></td>
<td><p>Triggered when validation is done and there were one or more violations.</p></td>
<td><p>Event | Data set ID</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>dhis2.ou.event.orgUnitSelected</p></td>
<td><p>Triggered when one or more organisation units are selected in the org unit web tree.</p></td>
<td><p>Event | Org unit IDs | Org unit names | Sub org unit IDs</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

To register for an event:

    <script type="text/javascript">

    dhis2.util.on( 'dhis2.de.event.formReady', function( event, ds ) {
      console.log( 'The form with id: ' + ds + ' is loaded!' );
    } );

    dhis2.util.on( 'dhis2.de.event.dataValueSaved', function( event, ds, dv ) {
      console.log( 'Data value: ' + dv.value + ' was saved with data element: ' + dv.de );
    } );

    dhis2.util.on( 'dhis2.de.event.completed', function( event, ds, cr ) {
      console.log( 'Form was completed for org unit: ' + cr.ou );
    } );

    </script>

> **Note**
>
> Be careful to only use "namespaced" events like the ones in the
> example above and not general ones like "click" as the dhis2.util.on
> method will deregister the event first.

If your function only applies to certain data sets you can use the
supplied data set identifier and shortcut your function for unwanted
data sets like
    this:

    dhis2.de.on( 'dhis2.de.event.validationSuccess', function( event, ds ) {
      if ( $.inArray( ds, ['utXOiGbEj14', 'Re7qzHEThSC'] ) == -1 ) {
        return false;
      }
      console.log( 'Form with id: ' + ds + ' validated successfully!' );
    } );

The identifiers of the input fields in the data entry form is on the
format described below. This format can be used to select the input
fields in your script and perform actions on them:

    <dataelementid>-<optioncomboid>-val

Since the data set identifier is provided for all events a feasible
alternative is to utilize the "files" Web API resource and keep your
callback functions in a single file, where you let the JavaScript code
take action based on which data set is currently loaded.

##### Functions { #functions } 

The DHIS2 data entry module contains JavaScript API functions which can
be accessed from custom data entry forms.

**dhis2.de.api.getSelections**: This function returns a JavaScript
object which contains properties for all dimensions with corresponding
values for the identifiers of the selected options. It contains
properties for "ds" (data set), "pe" (period), "ou" (organisation unit)
and identifiers for all data set categories.

An example response looks like this:

    {
     +  ds: "lyLU2wR22tC",
     +  pe: "201605",
     +  ou: "g8upMTyEZGZ",
     +  LFsZ8v5v7rq: "CW81uF03hvV",
     +  yY2bQYqNt0o: "yMj2MnmNI8L"
     +}

Example JavaScript usage of this function:

    var sel = dhis2.de.api.getSelections();
     +var orgUnit = sel["ou"];
     +var partner = sel["LFsZ8v5v7rq"];

### Change sharing settings for metadata objects { #change-sharing-settings-for-metadata-objects } 

You can assign different sharing settings to metadata objects, for
example organisation units and tracked entity attributes. These sharing
settings control which users and users groups that can view or edit a
metadata object.

Some metadata objects also allows you to change the sharing setting of
data entry for the object. These additional settings control who can
view or enter data in form fields using the metadata.

> **Note**
>
> The default setting is that everyone (**Public access**) can find,
> view and edit metadata objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to modify.

2.  In the object list, click the context menu and select **Sharing
    settings**.

3.  (Optional) Add users or user groups: search for a user or a user
    group and select it. The user or user group is added to the list.

4.  Change sharing settings for the access groups you want to modify.

      - **Can edit and view**: The access group can view and edit the
        object.

      - **Can view only**: The access group can view the object.

      - **No access** (only applicable to **Public access**): The public
        won't have access to the object.

5.  Change data sharing settings for the access groups you want to
    modify.

      - **Can capture data**: The access group can view and capture data
        for the object.

      - **Can view data**: The access group can view data for the
        object.

      - **No access**: The access group won't have access to data for
        the object.

6.  Click en **Cerrar**.

### Delete metadata objects { #delete-metadata-objects } 

> **Note**
>
> You can only delete a data element and other data element objects if
> no data is associated to the data element itself.

> **Warning**
>
> Any data set that you delete from the system is irrevocably lost. All
> data entry forms, and section forms which may have been developed will
> also be removed. Make sure that you have made a backup of your
> database before deleting any data set in case you need to restore it
> at some point in time.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to delete.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Delete**.

3.  Click en **Confirmar**.

### Display details of metadata objects { #display-details-of-metadata-objects } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to view.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Show
    details**.

### Translate metadata objects { #translate-metadata-objects } 

DHIS2 provides functionality for translations of database content, for
example data elements, data element groups, indicators, indicator groups
or organisation units. You can translate these elements to any number of
locales. A locale represents a specific geographical, political, or
cultural region.

> **Tip**
>
> To activate a translation, open the **System Settings** app, click \>
> **Appearance** and select a language.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to translate.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Translate**.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > If you want to translate an organisation unit level, click
    > directly on the **Translate** icon next to each list item.

3.  Select a locale.

4.  Type a **Name**, **Short name** and **Description**.

5.  Click en **Guardar**.

## Manage indicators { #manage_indicator } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:manage_indicator-->

### About indicators { #about_indicator } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:about_indicator-->

An indicator is a formula that can consist of multiple data elements,
constants, organisation unit group counts and mathematical operators.
The indicator consist typically of a numerator and denominator. You use
indicators to calculate coverage rates, incidence and other values that
are a result of data element values that have been entered into the
system. Calculated totals do not have a denominator.

> **Note**
>
> You never enter indicator values directly in DHIS2, you calculate them.

An indicator formula can consist of mathematical operators, for example
plus and minus; functions (see below); and of the following elements:

<table>
<caption>Indicator elements</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 36%" />
<col style="width: 30%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Indicator element</th>
<th>Type</th>
<th>Description</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Constant</p></td>
<td><p>Component</p></td>
<td><p>Constants are numerical values which remain the same for all indicator calculations. This is useful in order to have a single place to change values that might change over time.</p>
<p>Constants are applied AFTER data element values have been aggregated.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Data elements</p></td>
<td><p>Component</p></td>
<td><p>Data elements are substituted by the data value captured for the data element.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Days</p></td>
<td><p>Operator</p></td>
<td><p>&quot;Days&quot; is special operator that always provides the number of days for a given indicator calculation.</p>
<p>For example: if you want to calculate the &quot;Percentage of time vaccine refrigerator was non-functional&quot;, you could define the numerator as:</p>
<p>(&quot;Days-&quot;Number of days vaccine refrigerator was available&quot;&quot;)/&quot;Days&quot;</p>
<p>If the fridge was available 25 days in June, the indicator would be calculated as:</p>
<p>(30-25/25)*100 = 17 %</p>
<p>If you want to calculate the total for Quarter 1, the number of days (&quot;Days&quot;) would be:</p>
<p>31+28+31 = 90</p>
<p>The &quot;Days&quot; parameter will always be the number of days in the period of interest.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Organisation unit counts</p></td>
<td><p>Component</p></td>
<td><p>You can use organisation unit groups in formulas. They will be replaced by the number of organisation units in the group. During aggregation, the organisation units in the group will be intersected with the part of the organisation unit hierarchy being requested.</p>
<p>This lets you use the number of public facilities in a specific district in indicators. This is useful for example when you create facility infrastructure surveys and reports.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Programs</p></td>
<td><p>Component</p></td>
<td><p>Click <strong>Programs</strong> and select a program to view all data elements, attributes and indicators related to a specific program.</p>
<p>The program components you include in your formula will have a program tag assigned to them.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

You can use the following functions in an indicator formula:
<table>
<caption>Indicator functions</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Indicator Function</p></th>
<th><p>Arguments</p></th>
<th><p>Description</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>if</p></td>
<td><p>(boolean-expr, true-expr, false-expr)</p></td>
<td><p>Evaluates the boolean expression and if true returns the true expression value, if false returns the false expression value. The arguments must follow the rules for any indicator expression.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>isNull</p></td>
<td><p>(element)</p></td>
<td><p>Returns true if the element value is missing (null), otherwise false.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>isNotNull</p></td>
<td><p>(element)</p></td>
<td><p>Returns true if the element value is not missing (not null), otherwise false.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>firstNonNull</p></td>
<td><p>(element [, element ...])</p></td>
<td><p>Returns the value of the first element that is not missing (not null). Can be provided any number of arguments. Any argument may also be a numeric or string literal, which will be returned if all the previous objects have missing values.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>greatest</p></td>
<td><p>(expression [, expression ...])</p></td>
<td><p>Returns the greatest (highest) value of the expressions given. Can be provided any number of arguments.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>least</p></td>
<td><p>(expression [, expression ...])</p></td>
<td><p>Returns the least (lowest) value of the expressions given. Can be provided any number of arguments.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

In the **Maintenance** app, you manage the following indicator objects:

<table>
<caption>Indicator objects in the Maintenance app</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Object type</p></th>
<th><p>Available functions</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Indicator</p></td>
<td><p>Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Indicator type</p></td>
<td><p>Create, edit, clone, delete, show details and translate</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Indicator group</p></td>
<td><p>Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Indicator group set</p></td>
<td><p>Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### Workflow { #workflow_indicator } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:workflow_indicator-->

1.  Create indicator types.

2.  Create indicators.

3.  Create indicator groups.

4.  Create indicator group sets.

### Create or edit an indicator type { #create_indicator_type } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_indicator_type-->

![](resources/images/maintainence/indicator_type_create.png)

Indicator types define a factor that is applied during aggregation.
Indicator values that are calculated during a data mart export or report
table generation process will appear properly formatted, and will
therefore not require an additional multiplier (for example 100 in the
case of percent) for the values to appear correctly formatted.

> **Note**
>
> As of version 2.4 of DHIS2, the "Calculated data element" object has
> been deprecated. Instead, you can create a calculated data element by
> creating an indicator type with a factor of "1" and by setting the
> "Number" option to "Yes". The effect of setting the "Number" option to
> "Yes" will be that the indicator will effectively not have a
> denominator. You will therefore only be able to define a numerator,
> which will serve as the formula of the calculated data element.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Indicator** \> **Indicator
    type**.

2.  Click en el botón agregar.

3.  In the **Name** field, type the name of the indicator type, for
    example "Per cent", "Per thousand", "Per ten thousand".

4.  Type a **Factor**.

    The factor is the numeric factor that will be multiplied by the
    indicator formula during the calculation of the indicator.

5.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Create or edit an indicator { #create_indicator } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_indicator-->

![](resources/images/maintainence/indicator_create.png)

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Indicator** \>
    **Indicator**.

2.  Click en el botón agregar.

3.  In the **Name** field, type the full name of the indicator, for
    example "Incidence of confirmed malaria cases per 1000 population".

4.  In the **Short name** field, type an abbreviated name of the
    indicator, for example "Inc conf. malaria per 1000 pop".

    The short name must be less than or equal to 25 characters,
    including spaces.

5.  (Optional) In the **Code** field, assign a code.

    In many countries indicators are assigned a code.

5.  (Optional) In the **Color** field, assign a color to reprersent the indicator.

5.  (Optional) In the **Icon** field, assign an icon to illustrate the meaning of the indicator.

6.  In the **Description** field, type a brief, informative description
    of the indicator and how it is calculated.

7.  If you want to apply an annualization factor during the calculation
    of the indicator, select **Annualized**.

    Typically, an annualized indicator's numerator is multiplied by a
    factor of 12, and the denominator is for instance a yearly
    population figure. This allows for monthly coverage values to be
    calculated with yearly population figures.

8.  Select the number of **Decimals in data output**.

9.  Select an **Indicator type**.

    This field determines a factor that will automatically be applied
    during the calculation of the indicator. Possible choices are
    determined by the indicator types. For example, a "Percent"
    indicator will automatically be multiplied by a factor of 100 when
    exported to the data mart, so that it will display as a percentage.

10. (Optional) Assign one or multiple **Legends**.

11. In the **URL** field, enter a link, for example a link to an
    indicator registry, where a full metadata description of the
    indicator can be made available.

12. (Optional) Enter a **Category option combination for aggregate data
    export.**.

    You use this setting to map aggregated data exported as raw data to
    another server. Typically you do this type of data exchange mapping
    when you want to create anonymous aggregated data from patient data
    recorded in programs (event data).

13. (Optional) Enter an **Attribute option combination for aggregate
    data export.**.

    You use this setting to map aggregated data exported as raw data to
    another server. Typically you do this type of data exchange mapping
    when you want to create anonymous aggregated data from patient data
    recorded in programs (event data).

14. If applicable, enter custom attributes values, for example
    **Classification** or **Collection method**.

    > **Note**
    >
    > You create custom attributes in the **Maintenance** app: **Other**
    > \> **Attributes**.

15. Click **Edit numerator**.

    1.  Type a clear description of the numerator.

    2.  Define the numerator by double-clicking components in the
        right-hand field. The components then appears as part of the
        formula in the left-hand field. Add mathematical operators by
        double-clicking the icons below the left-hand field.

        You formula must be mathematically valid. This includes correct
        use of parentheses when necessary.

    3.  Click **Done** to save all changes to the numerator.

16. Click **Edit denominator**.

    1.  Type a clear description of the denominator.

    2.  Define the denominator by double-clicking components in the
        right-hand field. The components then appears as part of the
        formula in the left-hand field. Add mathematical operators by
        double-clicking the icons below the left-hand field.

        You formula must be mathematically valid. This includes correct
        use of parentheses when necessary.

    3.  Click **Done** to save all changes to the denominator.

17. If applicable, select compulsory indicator group sets, for example
    **Human resources**.

    > **Note**
    >
    > You'll only see indicator group sets in this form if you've
    > created them and set them to **Compulsory**.
    >
    > You create indicator group sets in the **Maintenance** app:
    > **Indicator** \> **Indicator group set**.

18. Click en **Guardar**.

### Create or edit an indicator group { #create_indicator_group } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_indicator_group-->

![](resources/images/maintainence/indicator_group_create.png)

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Indicator** \> **Indicator
    group**.

2.  Click en el botón agregar.

3.  Type a name.

4.  Select indicators and assign them.

5.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Create or edit an indicator group set { #create_indicator_group_set } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_indicator_group_set-->

![](resources/images/maintainence/indicator_group_set_create.png)

Indicator group sets create combined groups of similar indicators. For
example, you might have a group of indicators called "Malaria" and
"Leishmaniasis". Both of these groups could be combined into a group set
called "Vector-borne diseases". Indicator groups sets are used during
analysis of data to combine similar themes of indicators.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Indicators** \> **Indicator
    group**.

2.  Click en el botón agregar.

3.  Fill in the form:

    1.  **Nombre**

    2.  **Descripción**

    3.  **Compulsory**

4.  Select indicator groups and assign them.

    Available indicator groups are displayed in the left panel.
    Indicator groups that are currently members of the indicator group
    set are displayed in the right hand panel.

5.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Clone metadata objects { #clone_metadata } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:clone_metadata-->

Cloning a data element or other objects can save time when you create
many similar objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to clone.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Clone**.

3.  Modify the options you want.

4.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Change sharing settings for metadata objects { #change-sharing-settings-for-metadata-objects } 

You can assign different sharing settings to metadata objects, for
example organisation units and tracked entity attributes. These sharing
settings control which users and users groups that can view or edit a
metadata object.

Some metadata objects also allows you to change the sharing setting of
data entry for the object. These additional settings control who can
view or enter data in form fields using the metadata.

> **Note**
>
> The default setting is that everyone (**Public access**) can find,
> view and edit metadata objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to modify.

2.  In the object list, click the context menu and select **Sharing
    settings**.

3.  (Optional) Add users or user groups: search for a user or a user
    group and select it. The user or user group is added to the list.

4.  Change sharing settings for the access groups you want to modify.

      - **Can edit and view**: The access group can view and edit the
        object.

      - **Can view only**: The access group can view the object.

      - **No access** (only applicable to **Public access**): The public
        won't have access to the object.

5.  Change data sharing settings for the access groups you want to
    modify.

      - **Can capture data**: The access group can view and capture data
        for the object.

      - **Can view data**: The access group can view data for the
        object.

      - **No access**: The access group won't have access to data for
        the object.

6.  Click en **Cerrar**.

### Delete metadata objects { #delete-metadata-objects } 

> **Note**
>
> You can only delete a data element and other data element objects if
> no data is associated to the data element itself.

> **Warning**
>
> Any data set that you delete from the system is irrevocably lost. All
> data entry forms, and section forms which may have been developed will
> also be removed. Make sure that you have made a backup of your
> database before deleting any data set in case you need to restore it
> at some point in time.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to delete.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Delete**.

3.  Click en **Confirmar**.

### Display details of metadata objects { #display-details-of-metadata-objects } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to view.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Show
    details**.

### Translate metadata objects { #translate-metadata-objects } 

DHIS2 provides functionality for translations of database content, for
example data elements, data element groups, indicators, indicator groups
or organisation units. You can translate these elements to any number of
locales. A locale represents a specific geographical, political, or
cultural region.

> **Tip**
>
> To activate a translation, open the **System Settings** app, click \>
> **Appearance** and select a language.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to translate.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Translate**.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > If you want to translate an organisation unit level, click
    > directly on the **Translate** icon next to each list item.

3.  Select a locale.

4.  Type a **Name**, **Short name** and **Description**.

5.  Click en **Guardar**.

## Manage organisation units { #manage_organisation_unit } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:manage_organisation_unit-->

In this section you will learn how to:

  - Create a new organisation unit and build up the organisation unit
    hierarchy

  - Create organisation unit groups, group sets, and assign organisation
    units to them

  - Modify the organisation unit hierarchy

### About organisation units { #about_organisation_unit } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:about_organisation_unit-->

The organisation unit hierarchy defines the organisation structure of
DHIS2, for example how health facilities, administrative areas and other
geographical areas are arranged with respect to each other. It is the
"where" dimension of DHIS2, similar to how periods represent the "when"
dimension.

The organisation unit hierarchy is built up by parent-child relations.
In DHIS2, each of these nodes is an organisation unit. A country might
for example have eight provinces, and each province might have a number
of districts as children. Normally, the lowest levels consist of
facilities where data is collected. Data collecting facilities can also
be located at higher levels, for example national or provincial
hospitals. Therefore, you can create skewed organisation trees in DHIS2.

  - You can only have one organisation hierarchy at the same time.

  - You can have any number of levels in a hierarchy.

    Typically national organisation hierarchies in public health have
    four to six levels.

  - You can create additional classifications by using organisation
    groups and organisation group sets.

    For example to create parallel administrative boundaries to the
    health care sector.

  - It is recommended to use organisation unit groups to create a
    non-geographical hierarchy.

  - An organisation unit can only be a member of a single organisation
    unit group within an organisation unit group set.

  - An organisation unit group can be part of multiple organisation unit
    group sets.

  - The organisation unit hierarchy is the main vehicle for data
    aggregation on the geographical dimension.

  - Cuando cierra una unidad organizativa, no puede registrar ni editar
    events to this organisation unit in the **Event Capture** and
    **Tracker Capture** apps.

> **Important**
>
> You can change the organisation unit hierarchy after you've created
> it, even organisation units that collect data. However, DHIS2 always
> uses the latest hierarchy for data aggregation. So if you change the
> hierarchy, you loose the temporal representation of the hierarchy
> across time.
>
> District A is sub-divided into District B and District C. Facilities
> which belonged to District A are reassigned to District B and C. Any
> historical data, which you entered before the split occurred, is still
> registered as belonging to District B and C, not to the obsolete
> District A.

In the **Maintenance** app, you manage the following organisation unit
objects:

<table>
<caption>Organisation unit objects in the Maintenance app</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Object type</p></th>
<th><p>Available functions</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Organisation unit</p></td>
<td><p>Create, edit, clone, delete, show details and translate</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Organisation unit group</p></td>
<td><p>Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Organisation unit group set</p></td>
<td><p>Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Organisation unit level</p></td>
<td><p>Edit and translate</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Hierarchy operations</p></td>
<td><p>Move organisation units</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### Workflow { #workflow_organisation_unit } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:workflow_organisation_unit-->

The recommended workflow is:

1.  Create organisation units.

2.  Create organisation unit groups.

3.  Create organisation unit group sets.

### Create or edit an organisation unit { #create_organisation_unit } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_organisation_unit-->

![](resources/images/orgunits/create_new_orgunit.png)

You add organisation units to the hierarchy one by one, either as a root
unit or as a child of a selected organisation unit. You can only have
one root unit.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Organisation unit** \>
    **Organisation unit**.

2.  Click en el botón agregar.

3.  Select which organisation unit your new organisation unit will
    belong to:

    1.  Click **Parent organisation unit**.

    2.  In the organisation unit tree, locate the parent organisation
        unit and select it. Your selection is marked in yellow.

        > **Tip**
        >
        > Click the arrows to expand the organisation unit tree.

    3.  Click **Select**.

4.  Enter a **Name** of the organisation unit.

    Each organisation unit must have an unique name.

5.  Enter a **Short name** for the organisation unit.

    Typically, the short name is an abbreviation of the full
    organisation unit name. This attribute is often used in reports to
    display the name of the organisation unit, where space is limited.

6.  (Optional) Assign a **Code**.

    In many countries organisation units are assigned a code.

7.  (Optional) Type a **Description** of the organisation unit.

8.  Select an **Opening date**.

    The opening dates control which organisation units that existed at a
    point in time, for example when analysing historical data.

9.  If applicable, select a **Closed date**.

10. In the **Comment** field, enter any additional information that you
    would like to add.

11. (Optional) In the **URL** field, enter a link to an external web
    site that has additional information about the organisation unit.

12. Enter contact information:

      - Contact person

      - Address

      - E-mail

      - Número de teléfono

13. (Optional) Enter **Latitude** and **Longitude**.

    You must have latitude and longitude values to create maps in the
    **Maps** app. Then your organisation units can be represented as
    points on a map, for example a health facility. Without this
    information, the **Maps** app will not work.

    It might be more efficient to import coordinates later as a batch
    job for all organisation units using the **Import-Export** app. You
    also use the **Import-Export** app to create polygons. A polygon is
    an organisation unit that represent an administrative boundary.

14. If applicable, select **Data sets** and assign them.

    > **Note**
    >
    > You control whether a user should be able to assign data sets to
    > an organisation unit in the **System Settings** app:
    >
    > Open the **System Settings** app, click **Access** and select
    > **Allow assigning object to related objects during add or
    > update**.

15. If applicable, select **Programs** and assign them.

    > **Note**
    >
    > You control whether a user should be able to assign programs to an
    > organisation unit in the **System Settings** app:
    >
    > Open the **System Settings** app, click **Access** and select
    > **Allow assigning object to related objects during add or
    > update**.

16. If applicable, enter custom attributes values, for example **HR
    identifier**.

    > **Note**
    >
    > You configure the custom attributes in the **Maintenance** app:
    >
    > Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Other** \> **Attribute**.

17. Click en **Guardar**.

### Create or edit an organisation unit group { #create_organisation_unit_group } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_organisation_unit_group-->

Organisation unit groups allow you to classify related organisation
units into a common theme. You can for example group all organisation
units that are hospitals in an **Hospital** group.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Organisation unit** \>
    **Organisation unit group**.

2.  Click en el botón agregar.

3.  Fill in the form:

    1.  **Name**: Provide a precise, unique and descriptive name for the
        organisation unit group.

    2.  **Short name**: The short name should be less than 25
        characters. Typically, the short name is an abbreviation of the
        full organisation unit name. This attribute is used in certain
        places in DHIS2 where space is limited.

    3.  **Code**

    4.  **Symbol**: Select a symbol which will be used to display the
        organisation unit (points only) when the layer is displayed in
        the **Maps** app.

4.  In the organisation tree, click the organisation units you want to
    add to the organisation unit group.

    You can locate an organisation unit in the tree by expanding the
    branches (click on the arrow symbol), or by searching for it by
    name.

    The selected organisation units display in orange.

5.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Create or edit an organisation unit group set { #create_organisation_unit_group_set } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_organisation_unit_group_set-->

Organisation unit group sets allows you to create additional
classifications of organisation units. The group sets create new
dimensions so that you can make a more detailed data analysis. You an
easily filter, organise or aggregate data by groups within a group set.

  - You can have any number of organisation unit group sets.

  - The default organisation unit group sets are **Type** and
    **Ownership**.

  - An organisation unit can only be a member of a single organisation
    unit group within an organisation unit group set.

  - An organisation unit group can be part of multiple organisation unit
    group sets.

  - You can define whether an organisation unit group set is compulsory
    or not, which will affect the completeness of the data. Compulsory
    means that all organisation units must be member of a group in that
    group set.

> **Note**
>
> In the **Data integrity** part of the **Data administration** app you
> can verify if you've accidentally assigned the same organisation unit
> to multiple groups within the same group set. In this app you also
> find information about organisation units that are not members of a
> compulsory organisation unit group set.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Organisation unit** \>
    **Organisation unit group set**.

2.  Click en el botón agregar.

3.  Fill in:

    1.  **Name**: Provide a precise name for the organisation unit group
        set.

    2.  **Code**

    3.  **Description**: Describe what the organisation unit group set
        measures or captures.

4.  If you want all organisation units to be members of a group within
    the group set, select **Compulsory**.

5.  (Optional) Select **Data dimension**.

6.  (Optional) Select **Include subhierarchy in analytics**.

    If you select this, a sub-organisation unit will inherit the
    organisation unit group property from its closest "parent"
    organisation unit. Any property on the sub-organisation unit will
    override the inherit value.

    If an organisation unit have no associated organisation unit group,
    the organisation unit can inherit its closest parent's organisation
    unit group. If none of the parent organisation unit groups have an
    organisation unit group for a given org unit group set, the result
    will still be "blank", but if at least one parent has an
    organisation unit group, sub-organisation unit will inherit it.

    include subhierarchy in analytics" is enabled, which means the org
    units inherit their closest parents org unit group IF the org unit
    is white (no org unit group associated with it).

7.  Select organisation unit groups and assign them.

    In the left-hand list, you find the available organisation unit
    groups. Use the arrows to move selected groups between the two
    lists.

    If there are no organisation unit groups in the left-hand list,
    click **Add new**. In the form that opens, create the organisation
    units group you need. When you're done, click **Refresh values**.

    > **Note**
    >
    > An organisation unit can only be a member of a single organisation
    > unit group within an organisation unit group set.

8.  Click
**Save**.

![](resources/images/implementation_guide/organisation_unit_hiearchy.png)

You want to analyse data based on the ownership of the facilities. All
facilities have an owner so you need to make sure that all organisation
units get this classification. To do that you can use the **Compulsory**
option:

1.  Create a group for each ownership type, for example "MoH", "Private"
    and "Faith-based".

2.  Assign all facilities in the database to one of these groups.

3.  Create an organisation unit group set called "Ownership" and select
    **Compulsory**.

4.  Assign the organisation unit groups "MoH", "Private" and
    "Faith-based" to the "Ownership" organisation group
set.

![](resources/images/maintainence/analytics-include-org-unit-subhierarchy.png)

![](resources/images/maintainence/include-subhierarchy-analytics.png)

Group you organisation unit in two ways and aggregate data on these two
parallel hierarchies

Use to aggregate data (only in analytics apps)

An additional setting to the organisation unit group set, creates a
dynamic "membership" to a organisation unit group set.

You don't change the organisation unit hierarchy

Scalable and dynamic

Dynamic inclusion of hierarchy

Dynamic additional classification

### Assign names to organisation unit levels { #name_organisation_unit_level } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:name_organisation_unit_level-->

When you add children to an organisation unit, DHIS2 automatically
creates a new organisation unit level if necessary. The system also
assigns a generic name to this level, for example "Level 5". You can
replace the generic name with a contextual name, for example "Country",
"Province", "District" or "Health Facility". DHIS2 uses the contextual
names anywhere levels are referred to, for example in the **Maps** app.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Organisation unit** \>
    **Organisation unit level**.

    The loading time of the list depends on the depth of the
    organisation unit hierarchy tree.

2.  For the organisation unit levels you want to modify, type a name.

3.  Select the number of offline levels.

    > **Note**
    >
    > You configure the default value in the **System Settings** app:
    >
    > Open the **System Settings** app, click **General** and select a
    > level in the **Max offline organisation unit levels** list.

4.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Move organisation units within a hierarchy { #move_organisation_unit } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:move_organisation_unit-->

You can move organisation units within in the hierarchy by changing the
parent of a selected organisation unit.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Organisation unit** \>
    **Hierarchy operations**.

2.  In the left-hand hierarchy tree, select the organisation unit(s) you
    want to move.

    > **Note**
    >
    > If the selected organisation unit is has sub-organisation units,
    > all of them move to the new parent organisation unit.

3.  In the right-hand hierarchy tree, select which organisation unit you
    want to move the selected organisation unit(s) to.

4.  Click **Move x organisation units**, where x stands for the number
    of organisation units you have selected.

    Your changes are immediately reflected in the left-hand side
    hierarchy tree.

### Close an organisation unit { #close_organisation_unit } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:close_organisation_unit-->

When you close an organisation unit, you can't register or edit events
to this organisation unit in the **Event Capture** and **Tracker
Capture** apps.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Organisation unit** \>
    **Organisation unit**.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Edit**.

3.  Select a **Closed date**.

4.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Clone metadata objects { #clone_metadata } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:clone_metadata-->

Cloning a data element or other objects can save time when you create
many similar objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to clone.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Clone**.

3.  Modify the options you want.

4.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Change sharing settings for metadata objects { #change-sharing-settings-for-metadata-objects } 

You can assign different sharing settings to metadata objects, for
example organisation units and tracked entity attributes. These sharing
settings control which users and users groups that can view or edit a
metadata object.

Some metadata objects also allows you to change the sharing setting of
data entry for the object. These additional settings control who can
view or enter data in form fields using the metadata.

> **Note**
>
> The default setting is that everyone (**Public access**) can find,
> view and edit metadata objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to modify.

2.  In the object list, click the context menu and select **Sharing
    settings**.

3.  (Optional) Add users or user groups: search for a user or a user
    group and select it. The user or user group is added to the list.

4.  Change sharing settings for the access groups you want to modify.

      - **Can edit and view**: The access group can view and edit the
        object.

      - **Can view only**: The access group can view the object.

      - **No access** (only applicable to **Public access**): The public
        won't have access to the object.

5.  Change data sharing settings for the access groups you want to
    modify.

      - **Can capture data**: The access group can view and capture data
        for the object.

      - **Can view data**: The access group can view data for the
        object.

      - **No access**: The access group won't have access to data for
        the object.

6.  Click en **Cerrar**.

### Delete metadata objects { #delete-metadata-objects } 

> **Note**
>
> You can only delete a data element and other data element objects if
> no data is associated to the data element itself.

> **Warning**
>
> Any data set that you delete from the system is irrevocably lost. All
> data entry forms, and section forms which may have been developed will
> also be removed. Make sure that you have made a backup of your
> database before deleting any data set in case you need to restore it
> at some point in time.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to delete.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Delete**.

3.  Click en **Confirmar**.

### Display details of metadata objects { #display-details-of-metadata-objects } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to view.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Show
    details**.

### Translate metadata objects { #translate-metadata-objects } 

DHIS2 provides functionality for translations of database content, for
example data elements, data element groups, indicators, indicator groups
or organisation units. You can translate these elements to any number of
locales. A locale represents a specific geographical, political, or
cultural region.

> **Tip**
>
> To activate a translation, open the **System Settings** app, click \>
> **Appearance** and select a language.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to translate.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Translate**.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > If you want to translate an organisation unit level, click
    > directly on the **Translate** icon next to each list item.

3.  Select a locale.

4.  Type a **Name**, **Short name** and **Description**.

5.  Click en **Guardar**.

## \[Work in progress\] Manage validation rules { #manage_validation_rule } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:manage_validation_rule-->

### About validation rules { #about_validation_rule } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:about_validation_rule-->

A validation rule is based on an expression. The expression defines a
relationship between data element values. The expression forms a
condition with certain logical criteria.

The expression consists of:

  - A left side

  - A right side

  - An operator

A validation rule asserting that the total number of vaccines given to
infants is less than or equal to the total number of infants.

In the **Maintenance** app, you manage the following validation rule
objects:

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Object type</p></th>
<th><p>What you can do</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Validation rule</p></td>
<td><p>Create, edit, clone, delete, show details, and translate</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Validation rule group</p></td>
<td><p>Create, edit, clone, delete, share, show details, and translate</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Validation notification</p></td>
<td><p>Create, edit, clone, delete, show details, and translate</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

#### About sliding windows { #sliding_windows } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:sliding_windows-->

You can use sliding windows to group data *across multiple periods* as
opposed to selecting data for *a single period*. Sliding windows have a
size, that is to say, the number of days to cover, a starting point and
an end point. The example below shows disease surveillance data:.

  - The data in the orange section, selects data based on the current
    period. There is a threshold, which is calculated once for each week
    or period, and this is shown in the "Result" section.

  - The data in the blue section is the sliding window. It selects data
    from the past 7 days. The "Result" shows the total number of
    confirmed cases of a disease.

  - The validation rule makes sure users are notified when the total
    number of cases breaks the threshold for the period.

![](resources/images/maintainence/validation_rules_sliding_window.gif)

<table>
<caption>Different behaviour of validation rules</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>With sliding windows</p></th>
<th><p>Without sliding windows</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Used only for event data.</p></td>
<td><p>Used for event data and aggregate data.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Data selection is based on a fixed number of days (periodType).</p></td>
<td><p>Data selection is always based on a period.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>The position of the sliding window is always<em>relative to</em> the period being compared.</p></td>
<td><p>Data is always selected for the <em>same period</em> as the period being compared.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

See also: How to use sliding windows when you're [Creating or editing a
validation
rule](https://docs.dhis2.org/master/en/user/html/manage_validation_rule.html#create_validation_rule).

#### About validation rule groups { #about-validation-rule-groups } 

A validation rule group allows you to group related validation rules.
When you run a *[validation rule
analysis](https://docs.dhis2.org/master/en/user/html/validation_rule_analysis.html)*,
you can choose to run all of the validation rules in your system, or
just the validation rules in one group.

#### About validation notifications { #validation_notifications } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:validation_notifications-->

You can configure a validation rule analysis to automatically send
notifications about validation errors to selected user groups. These
messages are called *validation notifications*. They are sent via the
internal DHIS2 messaging system.

You can send validation rule notifications as individual messages or as
message summaries. This is useful, for example, if you want to send
individual messages for high-priority disease outbreaks, and summaries
for low-priority routine data validation errors.

### Create or edit a validation rule { #create_validation_rule } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_validation_rule-->

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Validation** \>
    **Validation rule**.

2.  Click en el botón agregar.

3.  Type a **Name**.

    The name must be unique among the validation rules.

4.  (Optional) In the **Code** field, assign a code.

5.  (Optional) Type a **Description**.

6.  Select an **Importance**: **High**, **Medium** or **Low**.

7.  Select a **Period type**.

8.  Select an **Operator**: **Compulsory pair**, **Equal to**,
    **Exclusive pair**, **Greater than**, **Greater than or equal to**
    or **Not equal to**.

    The **Compulsory pair** operator allows to require that data values
    must be entered for a form for both left and right sides of the
    expression, or for neither side. This means that you can require
    that if one field in a form is filled, then one or more other fields
    must also be filled.

    The **Exclusive pair** allows to assert that if any value exist on
    the left side then there should be no values on the right side (or
    vice versa). This means that data elements which compose the rule on
    either side should be mutually exclusive from each other, for a
    given time period / organisation unit /attribute option combo.

9.  Create the left side of the expression:

    1.  Click **Left side**.

    2.  Select **Sliding window** if you want to view data relative to
        the period you are comparing. See also [About validation
        rules](https://docs.dhis2.org/master/en/user/html/manage_validation_rule.html#about_validation_rule).

    3.  Select a **Missing value strategy**. This selection sets how the
        system evaluates a validation rule if data is missing.

        <table>
        <colgroup>
        <col style="width: 50%" />
        <col style="width: 50%" />
        </colgroup>
        <thead>
        <tr class="header">
        <th><p>Option</p></th>
        <th><p>Description</p></th>
        </tr>
        </thead>
        <tbody>
        <tr class="odd">
        <td><p>Skip if any value is missing</p></td>
        <td><p>The validation rule will be skipped if any of the values which compose the expression are missing. This is the default option.</p>
        <p>Always select this option you use the <strong>Exclusive pair</strong> or <strong>Compulsory pair</strong> operator.</p></td>
        </tr>
        <tr class="even">
        <td><p>Skip if all values are missing</p></td>
        <td><p>The validation rule will be skipped only if all of the operands which compose it are missing.</p></td>
        </tr>
        <tr class="odd">
        <td><p>Never skip</p></td>
        <td><p>The validation rule will never be skipped in case of missing data, and all missing operands will be treated effectively as a zero.</p></td>
        </tr>
        </tbody>
        </table>

    4.  Type a **Description**.

    5.  Build an expression based on the available data elements,
        program objects, organisation units, counts and constants.

        In the right pane, double-click the data objects you want to
        include in the expression. Combine with the mathematical
        operators located below the left pane.

    6.  Click en **Guardar**.

10. Create the right side of the expression:

    1.  Click **Right side**.

    2.  Select a **Missing value strategy**. This selection sets how the
        system evaluates a validation rule if data is missing.

        <table>
        <colgroup>
        <col style="width: 50%" />
        <col style="width: 50%" />
        </colgroup>
        <thead>
        <tr class="header">
        <th><p>Option</p></th>
        <th><p>Description</p></th>
        </tr>
        </thead>
        <tbody>
        <tr class="odd">
        <td><p>Skip if any value is missing</p></td>
        <td><p>The validation rule will be skipped if any of the values which compose the expression are missing. This is the default option.</p>
        <p>Always select this option you use the <strong>Exclusive pair</strong> or <strong>Compulsory pair</strong> operator.</p></td>
        </tr>
        <tr class="even">
        <td><p>Skip if all values are missing</p></td>
        <td><p>The validation rule will be skipped only if all of the operands which compose it are missing.</p></td>
        </tr>
        <tr class="odd">
        <td><p>Never skip</p></td>
        <td><p>The validation rule will never be skipped in case of missing data, and all missing operands will be treated effectively as a zero.</p></td>
        </tr>
        </tbody>
        </table>

    3.  Select **Sliding window** if you want to view data relative to
        the period you are comparing. See also [About validation
        rules](https://docs.dhis2.org/master/en/user/html/manage_validation_rule.html#about_validation_rule).

    4.  Type a **Description**.

    5.  Build an expression based on the available data elements,
        program objects, organisation units, counts and constants.

        In the right pane, double-click the data objects you want to
        include in the expression. Combine with the mathematical
        operators located below the left pane.

    6.  Click en **Guardar**.

11. (Optional) Choose which **Organisation unit levels** this rule
    should be evaluated for. Leaving this empty will cause the
    validation rule to be evaluated at all levels.

12. (Optional) Click **Skip this rule during form validation** to avoid
    triggering this rule while doing data entry

13. Click en **Guardar**.

### Create or edit a validation rule group { #create_validation_rule_group } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_validation_rule_group-->

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Validation** \>
    **Validation rule group**.

2.  Click en el botón agregar.

3.  Type a **Name**.

4.  (Optional) In the **Code** field, assign a code.

5.  (Optional) Type a **Description**.

6.  Double-click the **Validation rules** you want to assign to the
    group.

7.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Create or edit a validation notification { #create_validation_notification } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_validation_notification-->

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Validation** \>
    **Validation notification**.

2.  Click en el botón agregar.

3.  Type a **Name**.

4.  (Optional) In the **Code** field, assign a code.

5.  Select **Validation rules**.

6.  Select **Recipient user groups**.

7.  (Optional) Select **Notify users in hierarchy only**.

    If you select this option, the system will filter the recipient
    users. (The system derives the recipient users from the recipient
    user groups.) The filter is based on which organisation unit the
    recipient user belongs to. The users linked to organisation units
    which are ancestors of the organisation unit where the violation
    took place will receive validation notifications. The system will
    ignore other users and these users won't receive validation
    notifications.

8.  Create the message template:

    1.  Create the **Subject template**.

        Double-click the parameters in the **Template variables** field
        to add them to your subject.

    2.  Create the **Message template**.

        Double-click the parameter names in the **Template variables**
        field to add them to your message.

9.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Clone metadata objects { #clone_metadata } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:clone_metadata-->

Cloning a data element or other objects can save time when you create
many similar objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to clone.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Clone**.

3.  Modify the options you want.

4.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Change sharing settings for metadata objects { #change-sharing-settings-for-metadata-objects } 

You can assign different sharing settings to metadata objects, for
example organisation units and tracked entity attributes. These sharing
settings control which users and users groups that can view or edit a
metadata object.

Some metadata objects also allows you to change the sharing setting of
data entry for the object. These additional settings control who can
view or enter data in form fields using the metadata.

> **Note**
>
> The default setting is that everyone (**Public access**) can find,
> view and edit metadata objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to modify.

2.  In the object list, click the context menu and select **Sharing
    settings**.

3.  (Optional) Add users or user groups: search for a user or a user
    group and select it. The user or user group is added to the list.

4.  Change sharing settings for the access groups you want to modify.

      - **Can edit and view**: The access group can view and edit the
        object.

      - **Can view only**: The access group can view the object.

      - **No access** (only applicable to **Public access**): The public
        won't have access to the object.

5.  Change data sharing settings for the access groups you want to
    modify.

      - **Can capture data**: The access group can view and capture data
        for the object.

      - **Can view data**: The access group can view data for the
        object.

      - **No access**: The access group won't have access to data for
        the object.

6.  Click en **Cerrar**.

### Delete metadata objects { #delete-metadata-objects } 

> **Note**
>
> You can only delete a data element and other data element objects if
> no data is associated to the data element itself.

> **Warning**
>
> Any data set that you delete from the system is irrevocably lost. All
> data entry forms, and section forms which may have been developed will
> also be removed. Make sure that you have made a backup of your
> database before deleting any data set in case you need to restore it
> at some point in time.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to delete.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Delete**.

3.  Click en **Confirmar**.

### Display details of metadata objects { #display-details-of-metadata-objects } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to view.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Show
    details**.

### Translate metadata objects { #translate-metadata-objects } 

DHIS2 provides functionality for translations of database content, for
example data elements, data element groups, indicators, indicator groups
or organisation units. You can translate these elements to any number of
locales. A locale represents a specific geographical, political, or
cultural region.

> **Tip**
>
> To activate a translation, open the **System Settings** app, click \>
> **Appearance** and select a language.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to translate.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Translate**.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > If you want to translate an organisation unit level, click
    > directly on the **Translate** icon next to each list item.

3.  Select a locale.

4.  Type a **Name**, **Short name** and **Description**.

5.  Click en **Guardar**.

## Manage attributes { #manage_attribute } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:manage_attribute-->

### About attributes { #about_attribute } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:about_attribute-->

You can use metadata attributes to add additional information to
metadata objects. In addition to the standard attributes for each of
these objects it may be useful to store information for additional
attributes, for example the collection method for a data element.


![](resources/images/maintainence/attribute_create.png)

In the **Maintenance** app, you manage the following attribute objects:

<table>
<caption>Attribute objects in the Maintenance app</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Object type</p></th>
<th><p>Available functions</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Attribute</p></td>
<td><p>Create, edit, clone, delete, show details and translate</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### Create or edit an attribute { #create-or-edit-an-attribute } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Attribute**.

2.  Click en el botón agregar.

3.  In the **Name** field, type the name of the attribute.

    Each attribute must have a unique name

4.  (Optional) In the **Code** field, assign a code.

5.  Select a **Value type**.

    If the value supplied for the attribute does not match the value
    type you will get a warning.

6.  Select an **Option set**.

7.  Select the options you want, for example:

      - Select **Mandatory** if you want an object to always have the
        dynamic attribute.

      - Select **Unique** if you want the system to enforce that values
        are unique for a specific object type.

8.  Click en **Guardar**.

    The dynamic attribute is now available for the objects you assigned
    it to.

### Clone metadata objects { #clone_metadata } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:clone_metadata-->

Cloning a data element or other objects can save time when you create
many similar objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to clone.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Clone**.

3.  Modify the options you want.

4.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Delete metadata objects { #delete-metadata-objects } 

> **Note**
>
> You can only delete a data element and other data element objects if
> no data is associated to the data element itself.

> **Warning**
>
> Any data set that you delete from the system is irrevocably lost. All
> data entry forms, and section forms which may have been developed will
> also be removed. Make sure that you have made a backup of your
> database before deleting any data set in case you need to restore it
> at some point in time.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to delete.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Delete**.

3.  Click en **Confirmar**.

### Display details of metadata objects { #display-details-of-metadata-objects } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to view.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Show
    details**.

### Translate metadata objects { #translate-metadata-objects } 

DHIS2 provides functionality for translations of database content, for
example data elements, data element groups, indicators, indicator groups
or organisation units. You can translate these elements to any number of
locales. A locale represents a specific geographical, political, or
cultural region.

> **Tip**
>
> To activate a translation, open the **System Settings** app, click \>
> **Appearance** and select a language.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to translate.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Translate**.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > If you want to translate an organisation unit level, click
    > directly on the **Translate** icon next to each list item.

3.  Select a locale.

4.  Type a **Name**, **Short name** and **Description**.

5.  Click en **Guardar**.

## Manage constants { #manage_constant } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:manage_constant-->

### About constants { #about_constant } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:about_constant-->

Constants are static values which can be made available to users for use
in data elements and indicators. Some indicators, such as "Couple year
protection rate" depend on constants which usually do not change over
time.


![](resources/images/maintainence/constant_create.png)

In the **Maintenance** app, you manage the following constant objects:

<table>
<caption>Constant objects in the Maintenance app</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Object type</p></th>
<th><p>Available functions</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Constant</p></td>
<td><p>Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### Create or edit a constant { #create_constant } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_constant-->

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Other** \> **Constant**.

2.  Click en el botón agregar.

3.  In the **Name** field, type the name of the constant.

4.  (Optional) In the **Short name** field, type an abbreviated name of
    the constant.

5.  (Optional) In the **Code** field, assign a code.

6.  In the **Description** field, type a brief, informative description
    of the constant.

7.  In the **Value** field, define the constant's value.

8.  Click en **Guardar**.

    The constant is now available for use.

### Clone metadata objects { #clone_metadata } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:clone_metadata-->

Cloning a data element or other objects can save time when you create
many similar objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to clone.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Clone**.

3.  Modify the options you want.

4.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Change sharing settings for metadata objects { #change-sharing-settings-for-metadata-objects } 

You can assign different sharing settings to metadata objects, for
example organisation units and tracked entity attributes. These sharing
settings control which users and users groups that can view or edit a
metadata object.

Some metadata objects also allows you to change the sharing setting of
data entry for the object. These additional settings control who can
view or enter data in form fields using the metadata.

> **Note**
>
> The default setting is that everyone (**Public access**) can find,
> view and edit metadata objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to modify.

2.  In the object list, click the context menu and select **Sharing
    settings**.

3.  (Optional) Add users or user groups: search for a user or a user
    group and select it. The user or user group is added to the list.

4.  Change sharing settings for the access groups you want to modify.

      - **Can edit and view**: The access group can view and edit the
        object.

      - **Can view only**: The access group can view the object.

      - **No access** (only applicable to **Public access**): The public
        won't have access to the object.

5.  Change data sharing settings for the access groups you want to
    modify.

      - **Can capture data**: The access group can view and capture data
        for the object.

      - **Can view data**: The access group can view data for the
        object.

      - **No access**: The access group won't have access to data for
        the object.

6.  Click en **Cerrar**.

### Delete metadata objects { #delete-metadata-objects } 

> **Note**
>
> You can only delete a data element and other data element objects if
> no data is associated to the data element itself.

> **Warning**
>
> Any data set that you delete from the system is irrevocably lost. All
> data entry forms, and section forms which may have been developed will
> also be removed. Make sure that you have made a backup of your
> database before deleting any data set in case you need to restore it
> at some point in time.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to delete.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Delete**.

3.  Click en **Confirmar**.

### Display details of metadata objects { #display-details-of-metadata-objects } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to view.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Show
    details**.

### Translate metadata objects { #translate-metadata-objects } 

DHIS2 provides functionality for translations of database content, for
example data elements, data element groups, indicators, indicator groups
or organisation units. You can translate these elements to any number of
locales. A locale represents a specific geographical, political, or
cultural region.

> **Tip**
>
> To activate a translation, open the **System Settings** app, click \>
> **Appearance** and select a language.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to translate.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Translate**.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > If you want to translate an organisation unit level, click
    > directly on the **Translate** icon next to each list item.

3.  Select a locale.

4.  Type a **Name**, **Short name** and **Description**.

5.  Click en **Guardar**.

## Manage option sets { #manage_option_set } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:manage_option_set-->

### About option sets { #about_option_set } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:about_option_set-->

Option sets provide a pre-defined drop-down (enumerated) list for use in
DHIS2. You can define any kind of options.

An option set called "Delivery type" would have the options: "Normal",
"Breach", "Caesarian" and "Assisted".


![](resources/images/maintainence/option_set_create.png)

<table>
<caption>Option set objects in the Maintenance app</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Object type</p></th>
<th><p>Available functions</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Option set</p></td>
<td><p>Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Option group</p></td>
<td><p>Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Option group set</p></td>
<td><p>Create, edit, clone, share, delete, show details and translate</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### Create or edit an option set { #create_option_set } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_option_set-->

> **Important**
>
> Option sets must have a code as well as a name. You can change the
> names but you can't change the codes. Both names and codes of all
> options must be unique, even across different option sets.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Other** \> **Option set**.

2.  Click en el botón agregar.

3.  In the **Primary details** tab, define the option set:

    1.  In the **Name** field, type the name of the constant.

    2.  In the **Code** field, assign a code.

    3.  Select a **Value type**.

    4.  Click en **Guardar**.

4.  For each option you need, perform the following tasks:

    1.  Click the **Options** tab.

    2.  Click en el botón agregar.

    3.  Type a **Name** and a **Code**. Optionally also select a
        **Color** and an **Icon** which will be used for this option in
        the data capture apps.

    4.  Sort the options by name, code/value or manually.

    5.  Click en **Guardar**.



### Create or edit an option group { #create_option_group } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_option_group-->

You can group and classify **options** within an **option set** by using **option groups**.
This way you can create a subset of options in an option set. The main purpose of this is to be able to filter huge option sets into smaller, related parts.

Options that are grouped can be hidden or shown together in tracker and event capture through program rules.

> **Note**
>
> You cannot change the **Option set** selected in an **Option group** once it has been created.

1. Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Other** \> **Option group**.

2. Click en el botón agregar.

3. Fill in the form:
    1. **Nombre**
    2. **Short name**
    2. **Code**
    4. **Option set**

4. Once an **Option set** is selected, you can assign the **Options** you want to group.

6. Click en **Guardar**.

### Create or edit an option group set { #create_option_group_set } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_option_group_set-->

**Option group sets** allows you to categorise multiple **option groups** into a set.
The main purpose of the option group set is to add more dimensionality to your captured data for analysis.

> **Note**
>
> You cannot change the **Option set** selected in an **Option group set** once it has been created.

1. Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Other** \> **Option group set**.

2. Click en el botón agregar.

3. Fill in the form:
    1. **Nombre**
    2. **Code**
    3. **Descripción**
    4. **Option set**
    5. **Data dimension**

        If you select **Data dimension**, the group set will be available to the analytics as another dimension, in addition to the standard dimensions of “Period” and “Organisation unit”.

4. Select option groups and assign them.

    Available option groups are displayed in the left panel. Option groups that are currently members of the option group set are displayed in the right hand panel.

5. Click en **Guardar**.

### Clone metadata objects { #clone_metadata } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:clone_metadata-->

Cloning a data element or other objects can save time when you create
many similar objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to clone.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Clone**.

3.  Modify the options you want.

4.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Change sharing settings for metadata objects { #change-sharing-settings-for-metadata-objects } 

You can assign different sharing settings to metadata objects, for
example organisation units and tracked entity attributes. These sharing
settings control which users and users groups that can view or edit a
metadata object.

Some metadata objects also allows you to change the sharing setting of
data entry for the object. These additional settings control who can
view or enter data in form fields using the metadata.

> **Note**
>
> The default setting is that everyone (**Public access**) can find,
> view and edit metadata objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to modify.

2.  In the object list, click the context menu and select **Sharing
    settings**.

3.  (Optional) Add users or user groups: search for a user or a user
    group and select it. The user or user group is added to the list.

4.  Change sharing settings for the access groups you want to modify.

      - **Can edit and view**: The access group can view and edit the
        object.

      - **Can view only**: The access group can view the object.

      - **No access** (only applicable to **Public access**): The public
        won't have access to the object.

5.  Change data sharing settings for the access groups you want to
    modify.

      - **Can capture data**: The access group can view and capture data
        for the object.

      - **Can view data**: The access group can view data for the
        object.

      - **No access**: The access group won't have access to data for
        the object.

6.  Click en **Cerrar**.

### Delete metadata objects { #delete-metadata-objects } 

> **Note**
>
> You can only delete a data element and other data element objects if
> no data is associated to the data element itself.

> **Warning**
>
> Any data set that you delete from the system is irrevocably lost. All
> data entry forms, and section forms which may have been developed will
> also be removed. Make sure that you have made a backup of your
> database before deleting any data set in case you need to restore it
> at some point in time.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to delete.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Delete**.

3.  Click en **Confirmar**.

### Display details of metadata objects { #display-details-of-metadata-objects } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to view.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Show
    details**.

### Translate metadata objects { #translate-metadata-objects } 

DHIS2 provides functionality for translations of database content, for
example data elements, data element groups, indicators, indicator groups
or organisation units. You can translate these elements to any number of
locales. A locale represents a specific geographical, political, or
cultural region.

> **Tip**
>
> To activate a translation, open the **System Settings** app, click \>
> **Appearance** and select a language.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to translate.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Translate**.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > If you want to translate an organisation unit level, click
    > directly on the **Translate** icon next to each list item.

3.  Select a locale.

4.  Type a **Name**, **Short name** and **Description**.

5.  Click en **Guardar**.

## Manage legends { #manage_legend } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:manage_legend-->

### About legends { #about_legend } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:about_legend-->

You can create, edit, clone, delete, show details and translate legends
to make the maps you're setting up for your users meaningful. You create
maps in the **Maps** app.

> **Note**
>
> Continuous legends must consist of legend items that end and start
> with the same value, for example: 0-50 and 50-80. Do not set legend
> items like this: 0-50 and 51-80. This will create gaps in your legend.

### Create or edit a legend { #create_legend } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_legend-->

> **Note**
>
> It is not allowed to have gaps in a legend.
>
> It is not allowed to have overlapping legend items.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Other** \> **Legend**.

2.  Click en el botón agregar.

3.  In the **Name** field, type the legend name.

4.  (Optional) In the **Code** field, assign a code.

5.  Create the legend items you want to have in your legend:

    1.  Select **Start value** and **End value**.

    2.  Select **Number of legend items**.

    3.  Select a color scheme.

    4.  Click **Create legend items**.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > Click the options menu to edit or delete a legend item.

6.  (Optional) Add more legend items:

    1.  Click en el botón agregar.

    2.  Enter a name and select a start value, an end value and a color.

    3.  Click **OK**.

7.  (Optional) Change the color scales.

    1.  Click the colour scale to view a list of color scale options,
        and select a color scale.

    2.  To customize a color scale, click the add button. In the **Edit
        legend item** dialog, click the color scale button and hand-pick
        colors, or enter your color values.

8.  Click en **Guardar**.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Legend item</th>
<th>Start value</th>
<th>End value</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Low bad</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>50</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Medium</td>
<td>50</td>
<td>80</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>High good</td>
<td>80</td>
<td>100</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Too high</td>
<td>100</td>
<td>1000</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### Clone metadata objects { #clone_metadata } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:clone_metadata-->

Cloning a data element or other objects can save time when you create
many similar objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to clone.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Clone**.

3.  Modify the options you want.

4.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Change sharing settings for metadata objects { #change-sharing-settings-for-metadata-objects } 

You can assign different sharing settings to metadata objects, for
example organisation units and tracked entity attributes. These sharing
settings control which users and users groups that can view or edit a
metadata object.

Some metadata objects also allows you to change the sharing setting of
data entry for the object. These additional settings control who can
view or enter data in form fields using the metadata.

> **Note**
>
> The default setting is that everyone (**Public access**) can find,
> view and edit metadata objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to modify.

2.  In the object list, click the context menu and select **Sharing
    settings**.

3.  (Optional) Add users or user groups: search for a user or a user
    group and select it. The user or user group is added to the list.

4.  Change sharing settings for the access groups you want to modify.

      - **Can edit and view**: The access group can view and edit the
        object.

      - **Can view only**: The access group can view the object.

      - **No access** (only applicable to **Public access**): The public
        won't have access to the object.

5.  Change data sharing settings for the access groups you want to
    modify.

      - **Can capture data**: The access group can view and capture data
        for the object.

      - **Can view data**: The access group can view data for the
        object.

      - **No access**: The access group won't have access to data for
        the object.

6.  Click en **Cerrar**.

### Delete metadata objects { #delete-metadata-objects } 

> **Note**
>
> You can only delete a data element and other data element objects if
> no data is associated to the data element itself.

> **Warning**
>
> Any data set that you delete from the system is irrevocably lost. All
> data entry forms, and section forms which may have been developed will
> also be removed. Make sure that you have made a backup of your
> database before deleting any data set in case you need to restore it
> at some point in time.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to delete.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Delete**.

3.  Click en **Confirmar**.

### Display details of metadata objects { #display-details-of-metadata-objects } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to view.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Show
    details**.

### Translate metadata objects { #translate-metadata-objects } 

DHIS2 provides functionality for translations of database content, for
example data elements, data element groups, indicators, indicator groups
or organisation units. You can translate these elements to any number of
locales. A locale represents a specific geographical, political, or
cultural region.

> **Tip**
>
> To activate a translation, open the **System Settings** app, click \>
> **Appearance** and select a language.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to translate.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Translate**.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > If you want to translate an organisation unit level, click
    > directly on the **Translate** icon next to each list item.

3.  Select a locale.

4.  Type a **Name**, **Short name** and **Description**.

5.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Assign a legend to indicator or data element { #assign-a-legend-to-indicator-or-data-element } 

You can assign a legend to an indicator or a data element in the
**Maintenance** app, either when you create the object or edit it. When
you then select the indicator or data element in the **Maps** app, the
system automatically selects the assigned legend.

### See also { #see_also_legend } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:see_also_legend-->

  - [Using the GIS
    app](https://docs.dhis2.org/master/en/user/html/using_gis.html)

## Manage predictors { #manage_predictor } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:manage_predictor-->

### About predictors { #about-predictors } 

A predictor tells DHIS2 how to generate a data value based on data
values from past periods and/or the period of the data value. It defines
which past periods to sample, and how to combine the data to produce a
predicted value. A predictor always generates an aggregate data value,
but the past data values used to calculate the predicted value may come
from aggregate data, event data, or both.

A simple use of predictors would be to copy a past period data value
into a new period, for example into the next month, or into the same
quarter in the next year. A more complex use of predictors would be for
disease surveillance, to predict what value would be expected in a given
week or month of the year, based on previous data values. A validation
rule could then be used to see how the actual value compares with the
expected (predicted) value.

You can specify the organisation unit level(s) for which a predictor
will generate values. For example in disease surveillance you can use
one predictor to give the expected value at each local facility, given
the amount of variation you would expect at a single facility, while
using a different predictor to estimate the value you would expect
summed over all facilities in a district, given the (smaller)
proportional variation that you would expect when adding up the values
for all facilities in the district. You could also define additional
predictors at any higher levels of the organisation unit hierarchy,
where you might expect different proportions of variation.
Alternatively, you can define a single predictor for all these levels
and use the standard deviation function to determine what amounts of
deviation were measured at each level.

In the **Maintenance** app, you manage the following predictor objects:

<table>
<caption>Predictor objects in the Maintenance app</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Object type</p></th>
<th><p>Available functions</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Predictor</p></td>
<td><p>Create, edit, clone, delete, show details and translate</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### Sampling past periods { #sampling-past-periods } 

Predictors can generate data values for periods that are in the past,
present, or future. These values are based on data sampled from periods
before the predicted period, and/or data from the predicted period. When
you use data sampled from past periods (periods before the predicted
period), several parameters determine the choice of which past periods
to sample from:

#### Sequential sample count { #sequential_sample_count } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:sequential_sample_count-->

A predictor's *Sequential sample count* gives the number of immediate
prior periods to sample. For example, if a predictor's period type is
*Weekly* and the *Sequential sample count* is 4, this means to sample
four prior weeks immediately preceding the predicted value week. So the
predicted value for week 9 would use samples from weeks 5, 6, 7, and 8:


![](resources/images/maintainence/predictor_sequential.png){.center width=50% }

If a predictor's period type is *Monthly* and the *Sequential sample
count* is 4, this means to sample four prior months immediately
preceding the predicted value month. So the predicted value for May
would use samples from weeks January, February, March, and April:

![](resources/images/maintainence/predictor_sequential_month.png){.center width=51% }

The *Sequential sample count* can be greater than the number of periods
in a year. For example, if you want to sample the 24 months immediately
preceding the predicted value month, set the *Sequential sample count*
to 24:

![](resources/images/maintainence/predictor_24_months.png){.center width=57% }

#### Sequential skip count { #sequential_skip_count } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:sequential_skip_count-->

A predictor's *Sequential skip count* tells how many periods should be
skipped immediately prior to the predicted value period, within the
*Sequential sample count*. This could be used, for instance, in outbreak
detection to skip one or more immediately preceding samples that might
in fact contain values from the beginning of an outbreak that you are
trying to detect.

For example, if the *Sequential sample count* is 4, but the *Sequential
skip count* is 2, then the two samples immediately preceding the
predicted period will be skipped, resulting in only two periods being
sampled:


![](resources/images/maintainence/predictor_skip.png){.center width=50% }

#### Annual sample count { #annual_sample_count } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:annual_sample_count-->

A predictor's *Annual sample count* gives the number of prior years for
which samples should be collected at the same time of year. This could
be used, for instance, for disease surveillance in cases where the
expected incidence of the disease varies during the year and can best be
compared with the same relative period in previous years. For example,
if the *Annual sample count* is 2 (and the *Sequential sample count* is
zero), then samples would be collected from periods in the immediately
preceding two years, at the same time of year.


![](resources/images/maintainence/predictor_annual.png){.center width=53% }

#### Sequential and annual sample counts together { #sequential_annual_sample_count } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:sequential_annual_sample_count-->

You can use the sequential and annual sample counts together to collect
samples from a number of sequential periods over a number of past years.
When you do this, samples will be collected in prior years during the
period at the same time of year as the predicted value period, and also
in previous years both before and after the same time of year, as
determined by the *Sequential sample count* number.

For example, if the *Sequential sample count* is 4 and the *Annual
sample count* is 2, samples will be collected from the 4 periods
immediately preceding the predicted value period. In addition samples
will be collected in the prior 2 years for the corresponding period, as
well as 4 periods on either side:


![](resources/images/maintainence/predictor_sequential_annual.png){.center width=66% }

#### Sequential, annual, and skip sample counts together { #sequential_annual_skip_sample_count } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:sequential_annual_skip_sample_count-->

You can use the *Sequential skip count* together with the sequential and
annual sample counts. When you do this, the *Sequential skip count*
tells how many periods to skip in the same year as the predicted value
period. For example, if the *Sequential sample count* is 4 and the
*Sequential skip count* is 2, then the two periods immediately preceding
the predicted value period period will be skipped, but the two periods
before that will be sampled:


![](resources/images/maintainence/predictor_skip_2_weeks.png){.center width=66% }

If the *Sequential skip count* is equal to or greater than the
*Sequential sample count*, then no samples will be collected for the
year containing the predicted value period; only periods from past years
will be sampled:

![](resources/images/maintainence/predictor_skip_current_year.png){.center width=66% }

#### Sample skip test { #sample_skip_test } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:sample_skip_test-->

You can use the *Sample skip test* to skip samples from certain periods
that would otherwise be included, based on the results of testing an
expression within those periods. This could be used, for instance, in
disease outbreak detection, where the sample skip test could identify
previous disease outbreaks, to exclude those samples from the prediction
of a non-outbreak baseline expected value.

The *Sample skip test* is an expression that should return a value of
true or false, to indicate whether or not the period should be skipped.
It can be an expression that tests any data values in the previous period.
For example, it could test for a data value that was explicitly entered
to indicate that a previous period should be skipped. Or it could
compare a previously predicted value for a period with the actual value
recorded for that period, to determine if that period should be skipped.

Any periods for which the *Sample skip test* is *true* will not be
sampled. For example:


![](resources/images/maintainence/predictor_sample_skip_test.png){.center width=66% }

### Create or edit a predictor { #create_predictor } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_predictor-->

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Other** \> **Predictor**.

2.  Click en el botón agregar.

3.  In the **Name** field, type the predictor name.

4.  (Optional) In the **Code** field, assign a code.

5.  (Optional) Type a **Description**.

6.  Select an **Output data element**. Values generated by this
    predictor are stored as aggregate data associated with this data
    element and the predicted period.

    The value is rounded according to the value type of the data
    element: If the value type is an integer type, the predicted value
    is rounded to the nearest integer. For all other value types, the
    number is rounded to four significant digits. (However if there are
    more than four digits to the left of the decimal place, they are not
    replaced with zeros.)

7.  (Optional) Select an **Output category combo**. This dropdown will only show
    if the selected data element has categoryCombos attached to it. If this is
    the case, you can select which categoryCombo you would like to use.

8.  Select a **Period type**.

9.  Assign one or more organisation unit levels. The output value will be
    assigned to an organisation unit at this level (or these levels).
    The input values will come from the organisation unit to which the
    output is assigned, or from any level lower under the output
    organisation unit.

10.  Create a **Generator**. The generator is the expression that is used
    to calculate the predicted value.

    1.  Type a **Description** of the generator expression.

    2.  Enter the generator expression. You can build the expression by
        selecting data elements for aggregate data, or program data
        elements, attributes or indicators. Organisation unit counts are
        not yet supported.

        To use sampled, past period data, you should enclose any items
        you select in one of the following aggregate functions:

        <table>
        <colgroup>
        <col style="width: 50%" />
        <col style="width: 50%" />
        </colgroup>
        <thead>
        <tr class="header">
        <th><p>Aggregate function</p></th>
        <th><p>Means</p></th>
        </tr>
        </thead>
        <tbody>
        <tr class="odd">
        <td><p>avg(x)</p></td>
        <td><p>Average (mean) value of x</p></td>
        </tr>
        <tr class="even">
        <td><p>count(x)</p></td>
        <td><p>Count of the values of x</p></td>
        </tr>
        <tr class="odd">
        <td><p>max(x)</p></td>
        <td><p>Maximum value of x</p></td>
        </tr>
        <tr class="even">
        <td><p>median(x)</p></td>
        <td><p>Median value of x</p></td>
        </tr>
        <tr class="odd">
        <td><p>min(x)</p></td>
        <td><p>Minimum value of x</p></td>
        </tr>
        <tr class="even">
        <td><p>percentileCont(p, x)</p></td>
        <td><p>Continuous percentile of x, where p is the percentile as a floating point number between 0 and 1. For example, p = 0 will return the lowest value, p = 0.5 will return the median, p = 0.75 will return the 75th percentile, p = 1 will return the highest value, etc. Continuous means that the value will be interpolated if necessary. For example, percentileCont( 0.5, #{FTRrcoaog83} ) will return 2.5 if the sampled values of data element FTRrcoaog83 are 1, 2, 3, and 4.</p></td>
        </tr>
        <tr class="odd">
        <td><p>stddev(x)</p></td>
        <td><p>Standard deviation of x. Note: this function is still available for backwards comptibility and is eqivalent to stddevPop. It's suggested that you use the newer functions stddevPop or stddevSamp instead for greater clarity and for compatibility with future versions of DHIS 2.</p></td>
        </tr>
        <tr class="even">
        <td><p>stddevPop(x)</p></td>
        <td><p>Population standard deviation of x: sqrt( sum( (x - avg(x))^2 ) / n )</p></td>
        </tr>
        <tr class="even">
        <td><p>stddevSamp(x)</p></td>
        <td><p>Sample standard deviation of x: sqrt( sum( (x - avg(x))^2 ) / ( n - 1 ) ). Note that this value is not computed when there is only one sample.</p></td>
        </tr>
        <tr class="odd">
        <td><p>sum(x)</p></td>
        <td><p>Sum of the values of x</p></td>
        </tr>
        </tbody>
        </table>

        Any items inside an aggregate function will be evaluated for all
        sampled past periods, and then combined according to the formula
        inside the aggregate function. Any items outside an aggregate
        function will be evaluated for the period in which the
        prediction is being made.

        You can build more complex expressions by clicking on (or
        typing) any of the elements below the expression field:
        ( ) \* / + - Days.
        Constant numbers may be added by typing them. The Days
        option inserts \[days\] into the expression which resolves to
        the number of days in the period from which the data came.

        You can also use the following functions in your expression,
        either inside or containing aggregate functions, or independent
        of them:

        <table>
        <colgroup>
        <col style="width: 50%" />
        <col style="width: 50%" />
        </colgroup>
        <thead>
        <tr class="header">
        <th><p>Function</p></th>
        <th><p>Means</p></th>
        </tr>
        </thead>
        <tbody>
        <tr class="odd">
        <td><p>if(test, valueIfTrue, valueIfFalse)</p></td>
        <td><p>Evaluates <strong>test</strong> which is an expression that evaluates to a boolean value -- see <strong>Boolean expression notes</strong> below. If the test is <strong>true</strong>, returns the <strong>valueIfTrue</strong> expression. If it is <strong>false</strong>, returns the <strong>valueIfFalse</strong> expression.</p></td>
        </tr>
        <tr class="even">
        <td><p>isNull(item)</p></td>
        <td><p>Returns the boolean value <strong>true</strong> if the <strong>item</strong> is null (missing), otherwise returns <strong>false</strong>. The <strong>item</strong> can be any selected item from the right (data element, program data element, etc.).</p></td>
        </tr>
        </tbody>
        </table>

        **Boolean expression notes:** A boolean expression must evaluate
        to **true** or **false**. The following operators may be used to
        compare two values resulting in a boolean expression: \<, \>,
        \!=, ==, \>=, and \<=. The following operators may be used to
        combine two boolean expressions: && (logical and), and ||
        (logical or). The unary operator \! may be used to negate a
        boolean expression.

        Generator expression examples:

        <table>
        <colgroup>
        <col style="width: 50%" />
        <col style="width: 50%" />
        </colgroup>
        <thead>
        <tr class="header">
        <th><p>Generator expression</p></th>
        <th><p>Means</p></th>
        </tr>
        </thead>
        <tbody>
        <tr class="odd">
        <td><p>sum(#{FTRrcoaog83.tMwM3ZBd7BN})</p></td>
        <td><p>Sum of the sampled values of data element FTRrcoaog83 and category option combination (disaggregation) tMwM3ZBd7BN</p></td>
        </tr>
        <tr class="even">
        <td><p>avg(#{FTRrcoaog83}) + 2 * stddevSamp(#{FTRrcoaog83})</p></td>
        <td><p>Average of the sampled values of of data element FTRrcoaog83 (sum of all disaggregations) plus twice its sample standard deviation</p></td>
        </tr>
        <tr class="odd">
        <td><p>sum(#{FTRrcoaog83}) / sum([days])</p></td>
        <td><p>Sum of all sampled values of data element FTRrcoaog83 (sum of all disaggregations) divided by the number of days in all sample periods (resulting in the overall average daily value)</p></td>
        </tr>
        <tr class="even">
        <td><p>sum(#{FTRrcoaog83}) + #{T7OyqQpUpNd}</p></td>
        <td><p>Sum of all sampled values of data element FTRrcoaog83 plus the value of data element T7OyqQpUpNd in the period being predicted for</p></td>
        </tr>
        <tr class="odd">
        <td><p>1.2 * #{T7OyqQpUpNd}</p></td>
        <td><p>1.2 times the value of data element T7OyqQpUpNd in the period being predicted for</p></td>
        </tr>
        <tr class="even">
        <td><p>if(isNull(#{T7OyqQpUpNd}), 10, 20)</p></td>
        <td><p>If the data element T7OyqQpUpNd is null, then 10, otherwise 20.</p></td>
        </tr>
        <tr class="odd">
        <td><p>percentileCont(0.5, #{T7OyqQpUpNd})</p></td>
        <td><p>Continuous 50th percentile of the sampled values for data element T7OyqQpUpNd. Note that this is the same as median(#{T7OyqQpUpNd})</p></td>
        </tr>
        <tr class="even">
        <td><p>if(count(#{T7OyqQpUpNd}) == 1, 0, stddevSamp(#{T7OyqQpUpNd}))</p></td>
        <td><p>If there is one sample value present for data element T7OyqQpUpNd, then 0, otherwise the sample standard deviation of these sample values. (Note that if no samples are present then the stddevSamp returns no value, so no value is predicted.)</p></td>
        </tr>
        </tbody>
        </table>

10. (Optional) Create a **Sample skip test**. The sample skip test tells
    which previous periods if any to exclude from the sample.

    1.  Type a **Description** of the skip test.

    2.  Enter the sample skip test expression. You can build the
        expression by selecting data elements for aggregate data, or
        program data elements, attributes or indicators. Organisation
        unit counts are not yet supported. As with the generator
        function, you may click on (or type) any of the elements below
        the expression field: ( ) \* / + - Days. The functions IF() and
        ISNULL() as described above may also be used.

        The expression must evaluate to a boolean value of **true** or
        **false**. See **Boolean expression notes** above.

        Skip test expression examples:

        <table>
        <colgroup>
        <col style="width: 50%" />
        <col style="width: 50%" />
        </colgroup>
        <thead>
        <tr class="header">
        <th><p>Skip test expression</p></th>
        <th><p>Means</p></th>
        </tr>
        </thead>
        <tbody>
        <tr class="odd">
        <td><p>#{FTRrcoaog83} &gt; #{M62VHgYT2n0}</p></td>
        <td><p>The value of data element FTRrcoaog83 (sum of all disaggregations) is greater than the value of data element M62VHgYT2n0 (sum of all disaggregations)</p></td>
        </tr>
        <tr class="even">
        <td><p>#{uF1DLnZNlWe} &gt; 0</p></td>
        <td><p>The value of data element uF1DLnZNlWe (sum of all disaggregations) is greater than the zero</p></td>
        </tr>
        <tr class="odd">
        <td><p>#{FTRrcoaog83} &gt; #{M62VHgYT2n0} || #{uF1DLnZNlWe} &gt; 0</p></td>
        <td><p>The value of data element FTRrcoaog83 (sum of all disaggregations) is greater than the value of data element M62VHgYT2n0 (sum of all disaggregations) or the value of data element uF1DLnZNlWe (sum of all disaggregations) is greater than the zero</p></td>
        </tr>
        </tbody>
        </table>

11. Enter a **Sequential sample count** value.

    This is for how many sequential periods the calculation should go
    back in time to sample data for the calculations.

12. Enter an **Annual sample count** value.

    This is for how many years the calculation should go back in time to
    sample data for the calculations.

13. (Optional) Enter a **Sequential skip count** value.

    This is how many sequential periods, immediately preceding the
    predicted value period, should be skipped before sampling the data.

14. Click en **Guardar**.

### Create or edit a predictor group { #create_predictor_group } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_predictor_group-->

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Other** \> **Predictor
    group**.

2.  Click en el botón agregar.

3.  Type a **Name**. This field needs to be unique.

4.  (Optional) In the **Code** field, assign a code. This field needs to
    be unique.

5.  (Optional) Type a **Description**.

6.  Double-click the **Predictors** you want to assign to the group.

7.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Clone metadata objects { #clone_metadata } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:clone_metadata-->

Cloning a data element or other objects can save time when you create
many similar objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to clone.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Clone**.

3.  Modify the options you want.

4.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Delete metadata objects { #delete-metadata-objects } 

> **Note**
>
> You can only delete a data element and other data element objects if
> no data is associated to the data element itself.

> **Warning**
>
> Any data set that you delete from the system is irrevocably lost. All
> data entry forms, and section forms which may have been developed will
> also be removed. Make sure that you have made a backup of your
> database before deleting any data set in case you need to restore it
> at some point in time.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to delete.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Delete**.

3.  Click en **Confirmar**.

### Display details of metadata objects { #display-details-of-metadata-objects } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to view.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Show
    details**.

### Translate metadata objects { #translate-metadata-objects } 

DHIS2 provides functionality for translations of database content, for
example data elements, data element groups, indicators, indicator groups
or organisation units. You can translate these elements to any number of
locales. A locale represents a specific geographical, political, or
cultural region.

> **Tip**
>
> To activate a translation, open the **System Settings** app, click \>
> **Appearance** and select a language.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to translate.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Translate**.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > If you want to translate an organisation unit level, click
    > directly on the **Translate** icon next to each list item.

3.  Select a locale.

4.  Type a **Name**, **Short name** and **Description**.

5.  Click en **Guardar**.

## Manage push reports { #manage_push_report } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:manage_push_report-->

### About push reports { #about_push_report } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:about_push_report-->

Push reports allows you to increase awareness and usage of data analysis
by sending reports with charts, tables and maps directly to users e-mail
addresses.

  - A push report gets its content from existing dashboards.

  - A push report lists the dashboard items in the same order as on the
    dashboard.

  - A push report can only contain dashboard items with charts, maps or
    tables.

  - You create the push report and its schedule in the **Maintenance**
    app.

  - The **Title** and **Message** parameters you set up in the
    **Maintenance** app, are included in each report. The **Name** you
    give the report is not included in the report. Instead, the name is
    used to identify the push analysis object in the system. This way a
    report can be named one thing, and the title of the report can be
    another.

  - When you run a push report job, the system compiles a list of
    recipients from the user groups you've selected. The system then
    generates a report for each member of the selected user groups. Each
    of the dashboard items are generated specifically for each user.
    This means that the data included in the report reflects the data
    the user has access to. All users could therefore get the same
    report (if all the data is "static") or custom reports (if all the
    data is "dynamic"), or a combination of the two.

  - Push reports are sent by e-mail to the recipients, not through the
    internal DHIS2 messaging system. If a user doesn't have a valid
    e-mail, or if the job fails, no e-mails are sent. In this case, the
    problem is logged on the server.

> **Note**
>
> The data generated in the push reports is public so verify that you
> don't include any sensitive data.


![](resources/images/maintainence/push_report_ex.png)

In the **Maintenance** app, you manage the following push reports
objects:

<table>
<caption>Push reports objects in the Maintenance app</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Object type</p></th>
<th><p>Available functions</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Push analysis</p></td>
<td><p>Create, edit, clone, delete, show details, translate, preview and run</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### Create or edit a push report { #create_push_report } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_push_report-->

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Other** \> **Push
    analysis**.

2.  Click en el botón agregar.

3.  In the **Name** field, type the name of the scheduled report.

    This name is not included in the report e-mail. Instead, the name is
    used to identify the push analysis object in the system.

4.  (Optional) In the **Code** field, assign a code.

5.  Add a report **Title**.

    This title is included in the report e-mail.

6.  (Optional) Add a **Message**.

    This message is included in the report e-mail.

7.  Select a **Dashboard** to base the report on.

8.  Select and assign the user groups you want to send the report to.

9.  Select a **Scheduling frequency**: **Daily**, **Weekly** or
    **Monthly**.

    > **Note**
    >
    > If you schedule a push report to "Monthly" and "31", the scheduled
    > report job will not run if the month has less than 31 days.

10. (Optional) Select **Enable** to activate the push report job.

    The job won't run until you activate it.

11. Click en **Guardar**.

### Preview push reports { #preview_push_report } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:preview_push_report-->

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Other** \> **Push
    analysis**.

2.  In the push report list, locate the push report you want to preview.

3.  Click the options menu and select **Preview**.

    A preview of the push report opens in a new window.

### Run push report jobs { #run_push_report } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:run_push_report-->

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Other** \> **Push
    analysis**.

2.  In the push report list, locate the push report you want to run.

3.  Click the options menu and select **Run now**.

    The push report job runs immediately.

### Clone metadata objects { #clone_metadata } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:clone_metadata-->

Cloning a data element or other objects can save time when you create
many similar objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to clone.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Clone**.

3.  Modify the options you want.

4.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Delete metadata objects { #delete-metadata-objects } 

> **Note**
>
> You can only delete a data element and other data element objects if
> no data is associated to the data element itself.

> **Warning**
>
> Any data set that you delete from the system is irrevocably lost. All
> data entry forms, and section forms which may have been developed will
> also be removed. Make sure that you have made a backup of your
> database before deleting any data set in case you need to restore it
> at some point in time.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to delete.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Delete**.

3.  Click en **Confirmar**.

### Display details of metadata objects { #display-details-of-metadata-objects } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to view.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Show
    details**.

### Translate metadata objects { #translate-metadata-objects } 

DHIS2 provides functionality for translations of database content, for
example data elements, data element groups, indicators, indicator groups
or organisation units. You can translate these elements to any number of
locales. A locale represents a specific geographical, political, or
cultural region.

> **Tip**
>
> To activate a translation, open the **System Settings** app, click \>
> **Appearance** and select a language.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to translate.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Translate**.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > If you want to translate an organisation unit level, click
    > directly on the **Translate** icon next to each list item.

3.  Select a locale.

4.  Type a **Name**, **Short name** and **Description**.

5.  Click en **Guardar**.

## Manage external map layers { #manage_external_maplayer } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:manage_external_maplayer-->

### About external map layers { #about_gis_map_layers } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:about_gis_map_layers-->

You can customize GIS by including map layers from various sources and
combine them with your own data in DHIS2. DHIS2 supports common map
service formats such as Web Map Service (WMS), Tile Map Service (TMS)
and XYZ tiles.

### Create or edit an external map layer { #create_external_map_layer } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_external_map_layer-->

> **Note**
>
> DHIS2 only supports the Web Mercator projection
> ([EPSG:3857](https://epsg.io/3857)) so make sure that the external
> service supports this projection.

<table>
<caption>External map layer objects in the Maintenance app</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Object type</p></th>
<th><p>Available functions</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>External map layer</p></td>
<td><p>Create, edit, clone, delete, show details and translate</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Other** \> **External map
    layer**.

2.  Click en el botón agregar.

3.  In the **Name** field, type a name that describes the content of the
    external map layer.

    This is the name you'll see in the **Maps** app.

4.  (Optional) In the **Code** field, assign a code.

5.  Select a **Map service** format.

    DHIS2 supports three common map service formats:

      - Web Map Service (WMS)

        **Image format**: PNG format allows layers to be transparent,
        JPG format offers better compression and is often faster to
        load.

        **Layers**: A WMS can contain several individual layers, and you
        can specify which you want to include (comma separated). Refer
        to the WMS GetCapabilities document to see the available layers.

      - Tile Map Service (TMS)

      - XYZ tiles (can also be used for WMTS)

6.  Enter the **URL** to the map service.

    > **Note**
    >
    > XYZ and TMS URLs must contain placeholders {}, for example:
    > http://{s}.tile.osm.org/{z}/{x}/{y}.png.

7.  (Optional) Enter **Source** of the map layers. The field can contain
    HTML tags if you want to link to the source.

    When you use an external map service it is important to highlight
    where the data comes from.

8.  Select a **Placement**:

      - **Bottom - basemap**: For the Maps app, this makes the external map layer
        selectable as the base map (i.e. as an alternative to the DHIS2
        base maps).

      - **Top - overlay**: For the Maps app, this allows the external map to
        be added from the Add Layer selection and placed anywhere above
        the base map.

9.  (Optional) Add a legend.

    You can add a legend in two ways:

      - Select a predefined **Legend** to describe the colors of the map
        layer.

        > **Tip**
        >
        > Click **Add new** to create legends that you're missing. In
        > the form that opens, create the legends you need. When you're
        > done, click **Refresh values**.

      - Enter a link to an external image legend in **Legend image
        URL**.

        These are often provided for WMS. See under LegendURL in the WMS
        GetCapabilites document.

10. Click en **Guardar**.

### Clone metadata objects { #clone_metadata } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:clone_metadata-->

Cloning a data element or other objects can save time when you create
many similar objects.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to clone.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Clone**.

3.  Modify the options you want.

4.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Delete metadata objects { #delete-metadata-objects } 

> **Note**
>
> You can only delete a data element and other data element objects if
> no data is associated to the data element itself.

> **Warning**
>
> Any data set that you delete from the system is irrevocably lost. All
> data entry forms, and section forms which may have been developed will
> also be removed. Make sure that you have made a backup of your
> database before deleting any data set in case you need to restore it
> at some point in time.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to delete.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Delete**.

3.  Click en **Confirmar**.

### Display details of metadata objects { #display-details-of-metadata-objects } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to view.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Show
    details**.

### Translate metadata objects { #translate-metadata-objects } 

DHIS2 provides functionality for translations of database content, for
example data elements, data element groups, indicators, indicator groups
or organisation units. You can translate these elements to any number of
locales. A locale represents a specific geographical, political, or
cultural region.

> **Tip**
>
> To activate a translation, open the **System Settings** app, click \>
> **Appearance** and select a language.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and find the type of metadata object
    you want to translate.

2.  In the object list, click the options menu and select **Translate**.

    > **Tip**
    >
    > If you want to translate an organisation unit level, click
    > directly on the **Translate** icon next to each list item.

3.  Select a locale.

4.  Type a **Name**, **Short name** and **Description**.

5.  Click en **Guardar**.

## Manage SQL Views { #maintenance_sql_view } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:maintenance_sql_view-->

The SQL View functionality of DHIS2 will store the SQL view definition
internally, and then materialize the view when requested.

Database administrators must be careful about creating database views
directly in the DHIS2 database. For instance, when the resource tables
are generated, all of them will first be dropped and then re-created. If
any SQL views depend on these tables, an integrity violation exception
will be thrown and the process will be aborted.

The SQL views are dropped in reverse alphabetical order based on their
names in DHIS2, and created in regular alphabetical order. This allows
you to have dependencies between SQL views, given that views only depend
on other views which come earlier in the alphabetical order. For
instance, "ViewB" can safely depend on "ViewA". Otherwise, having views
depending on other view result in an integrity violation error.

### Creating a new SQL view { #creating-a-new-sql-view } 

To create a new SQL view, click **Apps** \> **Maintenance**
\> **Other** \> **SQL View** and click the Add **+** button.


![](resources/images/maintainence/create_sql_view.PNG)

The "Name" attribute of the SQL view will be used to determine the name
of the table that DHIS2 will create when the view is materialized by the
user. The "Description" attribute allows one to provide some descriptive
text about what the SQL view actually does. Finally, the "SQL query"
should contain the SQL view definition. Only SQL "SELECT" statements are
allowed and certain sensitive tables (i.e. user information) are not
accessible Press "Save" to store the SQL view definition.

### SQL View management { #sql-view-management } 

In order to utilize the SQL views, simply click the view and from the
context menu, choose "Execute query". Once the process is completed, you
will be informed that a table has been created. The name of the table
will be provided, and is composed from the "Description" attribute
provided in the SQL view definition. Once the view has been generated,
you can view it by clicking the view again, and selecting "Show SQL
View".

> **Tip**
>
> If you have a view which depends on another view, you should be
> careful about how the views are named. When analytics is run on the
> DHIS2 server, all views must be dropped, and are recreated. When
> analytics starts, the views are dropped in alphabetical order, and
> then recreated in reverse alphabetical order. Thus, if view A depends
> on view B, it must appear before view B in alphabetical order. If it
> appears after view B in alphabetical order, analytics may fail, as the
> view with dependencies will not be dropped in the correct order.

## Manage Locales { #maintenance_locale_management } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:maintenance_locale_management-->

It is possible to create custom locales in DHIS2. In addition to the
locales available through the system, you might want to add a custom
locale such as "English" and "Zambia" to the system. This would allow
you to translate metadata objects to local languages, or to account for
slight variants between countries which use a common metadata
definition.


![](resources/images/maintainence/locale_management.png)

The locale is composed of a language along with a country. Select the
desired values and press "Add". This custom locale will now be available
as one of the translation locales in the system.

## Edit multiple object groups at once { #edit_multiple_object_groups } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:edit_multiple_object_groups-->

The **Metadata group editor** in the **Maintenance** app allows you to
edit multiple object groups at the same time. You can edit the following
objects types:

<table>
<caption>Object types in the Metadata group editor</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Object type</p></th>
<th><p>Available functions</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Category option</p></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Category option group</p></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Data element</p></td>
<td><p>Add one data element to multiple data element groups</p>
<p>Remove one data element from multiple data element groups</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Data element group</p></td>
<td><p>Add multiple data elements to one data element group</p>
<p>Remove multiple data elements from one data element group</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Indicator</p></td>
<td><p>Add one indicator to multiple indicator groups</p>
<p>Remove one indicator from multiple indicator groups</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Indicator group</p></td>
<td><p>Add multiple indicators to one indicator group</p>
<p>Remove multiple indicators from one indicator group</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### Edit multiple objects in an object group { #edit-multiple-objects-in-an-object-group } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Metadata group editor**.

2.  Click **Manage items in group**.

3.  Select an object group type, for example **Indicator groups**.

4.  Select an object group, for example **HIV**.

5.  In the left-hand list, select the object(s) you want to add to the
    object group and click the right arrow.

6.  In the right-hand list, select the object(s) you want to remove from
    the object group and click the left arrow.

### Edit an object in multiple object groups { #edit-an-object-in-multiple-object-groups } 

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app and click **Metadata group editor**.

2.  Click **Manage groups for item**.

3.  Select an object type, for example **Indicators**.

4.  Select an object, for example **ANC LLITN coverage**.

5.  In the left-hand list, select the objects group(s) you want to add
    the object to and click the right arrow.

6.  In the right-hand list, select the object group(s) you want to
    remove the object from and click the left arrow.


# Manage users, user roles and user groups { #manage_user_role_group } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:manage_user_role_group-->

## About user management { #about_user_userrole } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:about_user_userrole-->

Multiple users can access DHIS2 simultaneously and each user can have
different authorities. You can fine-tune these authorities so that
certain users can only enter data, while others can only generate
reports.

  - You can create as many users, user roles and user groups as you
    need.

  - You can assign specific authorities to user groups or individual
    users via user roles.

  - You can create multiple user roles each with their own authorities.

  - You can assign user roles to users to grant the users the
    corresponding authorities.

  - You can assign each user to organisation units. Then the user can
    enter data for the assigned organisation units.

<table>
<caption>User management terms and definitions</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 40%" />
<col style="width: 40%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Term</p></th>
<th><p>Definition</p></th>
<th><p>Example</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Authority</p></td>
<td><p>A permission to perform one or several specific tasks</p></td>
<td><p>Create a new data element</p>
<p>Update an organisation unit</p>
<p>View a report</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>User</p></td>
<td><p>A person's DHIS2 user account</p></td>
<td><p>admin</p>
<p>traore</p>
<p>guest</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>User role</p></td>
<td><p>A group of authorities</p></td>
<td><p>Data entry clerk</p>
<p>System administrator</p>
<p>Antenatal care program access</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>User group</p></td>
<td><p>A group of users</p></td>
<td><p>Kenya staff</p>
<p>Feedback message recipients</p>
<p>HIV program coordinators</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

You manager users, user roles and user groups in the **Users** app.

<table>
<caption>Objects in the Users app</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 80%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Object type</p></th>
<th><p>Available functions</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>User</p></td>
<td><p>Create, edit, invite, clone, disable, display by organisation unit, delete and show details</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>User role</p></td>
<td><p>Create, edit, share, delete and show details</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>User group</p></td>
<td><p>Create, edit, join, leave, share, delete and show details</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### About users { #about-users } 

Each user in DHIS2 must have a user account which is identified by a
user name. You should register a first and last name for each user as
well as contact information, for example an email address and a phone
number.

It is important that you register the correct contact information. DHIS2
uses this information to contact users directly, for example sending
emails to notify users about important events. You can also use the
contact information to share for example dashboards and pivot tables.

A user in DHIS2 is associated with an organisation unit. You should
assign the organisation unit where the user works.

When you create a user account for a district record officer, you should
assign the district where he/she works as the organisation unit.

The assigned organisation unit affects how the user can use DHIS2:

  - In the **Data Entry** app, a user can only enter data for the
    organisation unit she is associated with and the organisation units
    below that in the hierarchy. For instance, a district records
    officer will be able to register data for her district and the
    facilities below that district only.

  - In the **Users** app, a user can only create new users for the
    organisation unit she is associated with in addition to the
    organisation units below that in the hierarchy.

  - In the **Reports** app, a user can only view reports for her
    organisation unit and those below. (This is something we consider to
    open up to allow for comparison reports.)

An important part of user management is to control which users are
allowed to create new users with which authorities. In DHIS2, you can
control which users are allowed to perform this task. The key principle
is that a user can only grant authorities and access to data sets that
the user itself has access to. The number of users at national, province
and district level are often relatively few and can be created and
managed by the system administrators. If a large proportion of the
facilities are entering data directly into the system, the number of
users might become unwieldy. It is recommended to delegate and
decentralize this task to the district officers, it will make the
process more efficient and support the facility users better.

### About user roles { #about-user-roles } 

A user role in DHIS2 is a group of authorities. An authority means the
permission to perform one or more specific tasks.

A user role can contain authorities to create a new data element, update
an organisation unit or view a report.

A user can have multiple user roles. If so, the user's authorities will
be the sum of all authorities and data sets in the user roles. This
means that you can mix and match user roles for special purposes instead
of only creating new ones.

A user role is associated with a collection of data sets. This affects
the **Data Entry** app: a user can only enter data for the data sets
registered for his/her user role. This can be useful when, for example,
you want to allow officers from health programs to enter data only for
their relevant data entry forms.

Recommendations:

  - Create one user role for each position within the organisation.

  - Create the user roles in parallel with defining which user is doing
    which tasks in the system.

  - Only give the user roles the exact authorities they need to perform
    their job, not more. Only those who are supposed to perform a task
    should have the authorities to perform it.

### About user groups { #about-user-groups } 

A user group is a group of users. You use user groups when you set up
sharing of objects or notifications, for example push reports or program
notifications.

See also:

[Compartir](https://ci.dhis2.org/docs/master/en/user/html/sharing.html)

[Manage program
notifications](https://docs.dhis2.org/master/en/user/html/manage_program_notification.html)

[Mange push
reports](https://docs.dhis2.org/master/en/user/html/manage_push_report.html)

## Workflow { #user_mgt_workflow } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:user_mgt_workflow-->

1.  Define the positions you need for your project and identify which
    tasks the different positions will perform.

2.  Create roughly one user role for each position.

3.  Create users.

4.  Assign user roles to the users.

5.  Assign the users to organisation units.

6.  (Optional) Group users in user groups.

7.  Share datasets with users or user-groups via the Sharing Dialog in
    Data set management section of the Maintenance app

> **Tip**
>
> For users to be able to enter data, you must add them to an
> organisational unit level and share a dataset with them.

## Manage users { #mgt_user } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:mgt_user-->

### Create a user { #create_user } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_user-->


![](resources/images/dhis2UserManual/select_user_menu.png)

1.  Open the **Users** app and click on the **+** in the **Users** card.

2.  Select whether you want to fill in all the personal user
    information, or invite the user by email to complete the rest of the
    user information:
 - **Create account with user details**
![](resources/images/dhis2UserManual/user_management_details.png)
Choose this option if you would like to enter all the login details of
the new user such as username, password, etc. Under these conditions, the fields username, password, surname, first
name, and roles are mandatory.<br/><br/>
After you've created the user, the account is ready for the user to use
with the user name and password that you provide.<br/><br/>
 - **Email invitation to create account**
![](resources/images/dhis2UserManual/user_management_invite.png)
Choose this option if you want to send an invitation by email to the
user. Then she/he must return to DHIS2 and finish setting up their user
account. The account that the user finishes setting up will be limited
according to how you configure the account.<br/><br/>
In order to use this feature "Enable email message notifications" in
SystemSettings -\> Messaging should be checked.<br/><br/>
Enter the email address to which the invitation should be sent. If you
want to, you may also enter the user name that the account will have. If
you leave the user name empty, then the user may choose their own user
name when they respond to the invitation (as long as it is not taken
already for another user.)<br/><br/>
After you've created the user, the system sends an email to the address
you provided. It contains a unique web link by which the user can return
to the system and activate their account by entering the rest of their
user information. The user must finish setting up the account within 4
days, after that the invitation becomes invalid.

3. (Optional) Provide values for the fields **OpenID, LDAP identifier, Mobile phone number, WhatsApp, Facebook messenger, Skype, Telegram and Twitter**.

4. Select an **Interface language**.<br/> 
You can select a language into which fixed elements of the DHIS2 user interface have been translated. 

5. Select a **Database language**. <br/>
You can select a language into which implementation-supplied
items have been translated in the database, for example data element
names or organisation unit level names.

6. In the **Available roles** section, double-click the user roles you want to assign to the user.

7. Select **Data capture and maintenance organisation units**.<br/>
 ![](resources/images/dhis2UserManual/user_management_fewer_options.png)<br/>
The data capture and maintenance organisation units control for which organisation units the user can do data entry. You must assign at least one data capture and maintenance organisation unit to each user.<br/><br/>
Users will have access to all sub-organisation units of the assigned
organisation units. For example, if you've assigned a user to a district
which has several facilities contained in the district, the user would
have access to the district's data, as well as all of the facilities
contained within the district.

8. (Optional) Select **Data output and analysis organisation units**.<br/><br/>
The data output and analysis organisation units controls for 
which organisation units the user can view aggregated data in the 
analytics apps, for example the **Pivot Table** and **GIS** apps. You 
can assign any number of data output and analysis organisation units to 
a user.<br/><br/>
Users will have access to all sub-organisation units of the
assigned organisation units. You shouldn't select the descendants of an
organisation unit which you have already selected. For example, if
you've assigned the user to a district, you shouldn't select the
facilities within that district.<br/><br/>

> **Note**
> 
>Assigning data output and analysis organisation units organisation units is optional. If you don't specify
>any organisation unit, the user will have access to the full
>organisation unit hierarchy for viewing aggregated data. As with the
>data capture organisation units, *you should not select descendant
>organisation units of a unit which you have already selected*.<br/><br/>
>In several places in the analytics apps, you can select "user organisation
>unit" for the organisation unit dimension. This mechanism will first
>attempt to use the data view organisation units linked to the current
>user. If not found, it will use the data capture and maintenance
>organisation units. If the user has been assigned to multiple
>organisation units, the use of "user organisation unit" may result in
>unpredictable behaviour.<br/><br/>

9. Click **Show more options** and an additional
three fields will show. (Optional) <br/><br/>

10. In the **Search organisation units** 
select the organisation units you want the user to be able to search in.<br/><br/>

11. (Optional) In the **Available user groups** section, double-click the
user groups you want to assign to the user.<br/><br/>

12. (Optional) In the **Available dimension restrictions for data analytics** section,
double-click the dimensions you want to assign to the user. <br/><br/>
You can restrict the values the user sees in data analytics apps by selecting
dimensions that will restrict the user's view.

> **Example**
>
> Let's say you have defined *Implementing Partner* as a category option group set, and you have shared with this user only one or more specific implementing partners (category option groups). If you want to make sure that the user does not see totals in analytics that include values from other groups, assign *Implementing Partner* to the user.<br/><br/>
This insures that any data visible to the user through the analytics apps will be filtered to select only the Implementing Partner category option group(s) which are visible to the user.<br/><br/>

13. Click **Save**. 

### Edit user objects { #edit-user-objects } 

1.  Open the **Users** app and find the type of user object you want to
    edit.

2.  In the object list, directly click the relevant object, or click the
    menu icon and select **Edit**.

3.  Modify the options you want.

4.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Disable users { #disable_user } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:disable_user-->

You can disable a user. This means that the user's account is not
deleted, but the user can't log in or use DHIS2.

1.  Open the **Users** app and click **User**.

2.  In the list, click the menu icon of relevant user record and select
    **Disable**.

3.  Click **OK** to confirm.

### Display a user's profile { #display-a-users-profile } 

1.  Open the **Users** app and click **User**.

2.  In the list, click the menu icon of the relevant user and select
    **Profile**.

### Filter users by organisation unit { #filter-users-by-organisation-unit } 

You can view all users that have been assigned to a particular
organisation unit.

1.  Open the **Users** app and click **Users**.

2.  Above the user list, click on the **Organisation Unit** filter
    input.

3.  A pop-up will appear in which you can select the organisation units
    you would like to filter by.

The list of users will be filtered to only include users which have been
assigned to the selected organisation units.

### Clone users { #clone_user } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:clone_user-->

1.  Open the **Users** app and click **User**.

2.  In the object list, click the menu icon of the relevant user and
    select **Replicate**.

3.  Enter a new user name and password for the cloned user account.

4.  Click **Replicate**.

5.  In the object list, click the user you just created and click
    **Edit**.

6.  Modify the options you want.

7.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Change user password { #user_manage_password } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:user_manage_password-->

To change a user's password:

1.  Open the **Users** app and click **User**.

2.  In the object list, click the menu icon of the relevant user and
    select **Edit**.

3.  Enter a new password and retype it.

4.  Click en **Guardar**.

#### Password requirements { #password-requirements } 

The following rules apply when you create a new password. The password must:

  - Contain at least 8 characters. Note that this number is configurable through the system setting "Minium characters in password", which can be up to 14 characters. 

  - Not contain more than 40 characters.

  - Contain at least one special character (non-alphanumeric character).

  - Contain at least one upper-case character.

  - Contain at least one lower-case character.

  - Contain at least one digit (number).

  - Not contain the username or email address of the user account.

  - Not contain generic words such as *system*, *admin*, *user*, *login*, and *manager*.

  - Not be one of the previous 24 passwords the user has used. This does not apply in case when a super user resets the password for another user.

### Delete user objects { #delete-user-objects } 

1.  Open the **Users** app and find the type of user object you want to
    delete.

2.  In the object list, click the menu icon of the relevant object and
    select **Remove**.

3.  Click **OK** to confirm.

### Display details of user objects { #display-details-of-user-objects } 

1.  Open the **Users** app and find the type of user object you want to
    view.

2.  In the object list, click the menu icon of the relevant object and
    select **Show details**.

### Disable Two Factor Authentication for a user { #disable-two-factor-authentication-for-a-user } 

If a user has enabled Two Factor Authentication and then loses access to
his/her authentication device (e.g. smartphone gets lost or broken),
this user will not be able to log into the system any more. To solve this
issue, a user manager can disable Two Factor Authentication for the
affected user, so that the user is able to access the system again using
just a password.

1.  Open the **Users** app and click **Users**.

2.  In the object list, click the menu icon of the relevant user and
    select **Disable Two Factor Authentication**.

3.  Click **OK** to confirm

> **Note**
>
> The option to disable Two Factor Authentication will only be available
> for users that have set up Two Factor Authentication via the
> user-profile-app.

## Manage user roles { #mgt_userrole } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:mgt_userrole-->

### Create a user role { #create_userrole } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_userrole-->


![](resources/images/dhis2UserManual/role_maintenance_page.png)

1.  Open the **Users** app and click **User role**.

2.  Click en **Agregar nuevo**.

3.  Enter a **Name**, for example "Super user" or "Admin user".

4.  Enter a **Description**.

5.  In the **Authorities** section, select the authorities you want to
    give to the user role. You can also use the filter inputs above the
    authority section to search for a specific authority.

6.  Click **Add**.

### Edit user objects { #edit-user-objects } 

1.  Open the **Users** app and find the type of user object you want to
    edit.

2.  In the object list, directly click the relevant object, or click the
    menu icon and select **Edit**.

3.  Modify the options you want.

4.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Delete user objects { #delete-user-objects } 

1.  Open the **Users** app and find the type of user object you want to
    delete.

2.  In the object list, click the menu icon of the relevant object and
    select **Remove**.

3.  Click **OK** to confirm.

### Display details of user objects { #display-details-of-user-objects } 

1.  Open the **Users** app and find the type of user object you want to
    view.

2.  In the object list, click the menu icon of the relevant object and
    select **Show details**.

### Change sharing settings for user objects { #change-sharing-settings-for-user-objects } 

1.  Open the **Users** app and find the type of user object you want to
    modify.

2.  In the object list, click the relevant object and select **Sharing
    settings**.

3.  (Optional) Search for a user group and select it, then click the
    plus icon. The user group is added to the list.

4.  (Optional) Select **External access (without login)**.

5.  Change the settings for the user groups you want to modify.
 - **None**
 - **Can view**: Everyone in the user group can view the object
 - **Can edit and view**: Everyone in the user group can view and edit the object

6.  Click en **Guardar**.

## Manage user groups { #mgt_usergroup } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:mgt_usergroup-->

### Create a user group { #create_usergroup } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create_usergroup-->

1.  Open the **Users** app and click **User group**.

2.  Click en **Agregar nuevo**.

3.  In the **Name** field, type the name of the user group.

4.  In the **Available users** section, double-click the users you want
    to add to the user group.

5.  In the **Available user groups** section, double-click the user
    groups you want to add to the user group.

6.  Click **Add**.

### Join user groups { #join_usergroup } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:join_usergroup-->

1.  Open the **Users** app and click **User group**.

2.  In the list, click the relevant user group and select **Join
    group**.

### Leave user groups { #leave_usergroup } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:leave_usergroup-->

1.  Open the **Users** app and click **User group**.

2.  In the list, click the relevant user group and select **Leave
    group**.

### Edit user objects { #edit-user-objects } 

1.  Open the **Users** app and find the type of user object you want to
    edit.

2.  In the object list, directly click the relevant object, or click the
    menu icon and select **Edit**.

3.  Modify the options you want.

4.  Click en **Guardar**.

### Delete user objects { #delete-user-objects } 

1.  Open the **Users** app and find the type of user object you want to
    delete.

2.  In the object list, click the menu icon of the relevant object and
    select **Remove**.

3.  Click **OK** to confirm.

### Display details of user objects { #display-details-of-user-objects } 

1.  Open the **Users** app and find the type of user object you want to
    view.

2.  In the object list, click the menu icon of the relevant object and
    select **Show details**.

### Change sharing settings for user objects { #change-sharing-settings-for-user-objects } 

1.  Open the **Users** app and find the type of user object you want to
    modify.

2.  In the object list, click the relevant object and select **Sharing
    settings**.

3.  (Optional) Search for a user group and select it, then click the
    plus icon. The user group is added to the list.

4.  (Optional) Select **External access (without login)**.

5.  Change the settings for the user groups you want to modify.
 - **None**
 - **Can view**: Everyone in the user group can view the object
 - **Can edit and view**: Everyone in the user group can view and edit the object

6.  Click en **Guardar**.

## Enable support for OpenID { #open_id } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:open_id-->

DHIS2 supports the OpenID standard, which allows third party login using
a OpenID provider, for more information see <http://openid.net>. To
create a custom OpenID URL for a user name you can visit this URL and
log in with your OpenID provider: <http://openid-provider.appspot.com>.

To enable support for OpenID in DHIS2, you must:

1.  **Set your OpenID provider**: This can be done inside system
    settings, under "Access". Here you can set both the OpenID provider,
    and also the label to display on the login page to login with this
    provider (defaults to Login with OpenID).

2.  **Set the OpenID identifier on the user**: For every user that
    should be able to login with his OpenID identifier, you will need to
    set this on the user itself. This can be done in user management,
    under the email field, there is not a field called *OpenID* which
    can be used to fill in the OpenID identifier.

## Decentralize user management { #decentralize-user-management } 

DHIS2 supports a concept for user management referred to as *managed
users* which allows to explicitly define which users should be allowed
to manage or modify which users. To "manage a user" implies that you can
see and modify that user. The basic concept for user management is that
you can see and modify users which you have been granted all of the
authorities; in other words you can modify users which have a subset of
your own authorities. The managed users concept gives you greater
control over this.

The managed users concept allows you to define which users should be
able to manage which users. This is configured through user groups and
memberships within such groups. A user group can be configured to be
allowed to manage other user groups from the standard add and update
user interface. The effect is that a specific user can manage all users
which are members of user groups which can be managed by a user group
that the user is member of. In other words, users can be managed by all
members of user groups which are managing user groups they are member
of.

To enable this concept you should grant users the authority to
"Add/update users within managed groups", and *not* grant access to the
standard "Add/update users" authority. An implication of the managed
users concept is that when creating a user with the "Add/update users
within managed groups" only, the user must be made a member of at least
one user group that the current user can manage. If not, the current
user would lose access to the user being created immediately. This is
validated by the system.

When granted the "Add/update users within managed groups" authority, the
system lets a user add members to user groups for which she has
read-only access to. The purpose of this is to allow for decentralized
user management. You may define a range of user groups where other users
may add or remove members, but not remove or change the name of the
group.

## Example: user management in a health system { #user_mgt_example } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:user_mgt_example-->

In a health system, users are logically grouped with respect to the task
they perform and the position they occupy.

1.  Define which users should have the role as system administrators.
    They are often part of the national HIS division and should have
    full authority in the system.

2.  Create roughly one user role for each position.

Examples of common positions are:

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 27%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Position</p></th>
<th><p>Typical tasks</p></th>
<th><p>Recommended authorities</p></th>
<th><p>Comment</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>System administrators</p></td>
<td><p>Set up the basic structure (metadata) of the system.</p></td>
<td><p>Add, update and delete the core elements of the system, for example data elements, indicators and data sets.</p></td>
<td>Only system administrators should modify metadata.
<p>If you allow users outside the system administrators team to modify the metadata, it might lead to problems with coordination.</p>
<p>Updates to the system should only be performed by the administrators of the system.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>National health managers</p>
<p>Province health managers</p></td>
<td><p>Monitor and analyse data</p></td>
<td><p>Access to the reports module, the <strong>GIS</strong>, <strong>Data Quality</strong> apps and the dashboard.</p></td>
<td><p>Don't need access to enter data, modify data elements or data sets.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>National health information system division officers (HISO)</p>
<p>District health records and information officers (DHRIO)</p>
<p>Facility health records and information officers (HRIO)</p></td>
<td><p>Enter data that comes from facilities which are not able to do so directly</p>
<p>Monitor, evaluate and analyse data</p></td>
<td><p>Access to all the analysis and validation apps</p>
<p>Access to the <strong>Data Entry</strong> app.</p></td>
<td><p>-</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Data entry clerks</p></td>
<td><p>-</p></td>
<td><p>-</p></td>
<td><p>-</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>


# User authorities { #user_authorities } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:user_authorities-->

<table>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Accept data at lower levels</td>
<td>F_ACCEPT_DATA_LOWER_LEVELS</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Access my data mart</td>
<td>F_MYDATAMART_VIEW</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add Facility</td>
<td>F_FRED_CREATE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add Locale</td>
<td>F_LOCALE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add Option Set</td>
<td>F_OPTIONSET_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add Organisation Unit Group Set</td>
<td>F_ORGUNITGROUPSET_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add Program Rule</td>
<td>F_PROGRAM_RULE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add Public Map</td>
<td>F_MAP_PUBLIC_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add Relationship Type</td>
<td>F_RELATIONSHIPTYPE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Remove Members In Read-Only User Groups</td>
<td>F_USER_GROUPS_READ_ONLY_ADD_MEMBERS</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add SQL View</td>
<td>F_SQLVIEW_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add Tracked Entities</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add Tracked Entity Attribute Value</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_ATTRIBUTEVALUE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add Tracked Entity Form</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_FORM_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add Tracked Entity Instance Comment</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_COMMENT_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add Tracked Entity Relationship</td>
<td>F_RELATIONSHIP_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Attribute</td>
<td>F_ATTRIBUTE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Chart</td>
<td>F_CHART_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Concept</td>
<td>F_CONCEPT_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Constant</td>
<td>F_CONSTANT_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Data Value</td>
<td>F_DATAVALUE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Indicator Type</td>
<td>F_INDICATORTYPE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Min/max rule</td>
<td>F_DATAELEMENT_MINMAX_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Organisation Unit</td>
<td>F_ORGANISATIONUNIT_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Private Category Option Group</td>
<td>F_CATEGORY_OPTION_GROUP_PRIVATE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Private Category Option Group Set</td>
<td>F_CATEGORY_OPTION_GROUP_SET_PRIVATE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Private Data Element</td>
<td>F_DATAELEMENT_PRIVATE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Private Data Element Category</td>
<td>F_CATEGORY_PRIVATE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Private Data Element Category Combo</td>
<td>F_CATEGORY_COMBO_PRIVATE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Private Data Element Category Option</td>
<td>F_CATEGORY_OPTION_PRIVATE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Private Data Element Category Option Combo</td>
<td>F_CATEGORY_OPTION_COMBO_PRIVATE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Private Data Element Groups</td>
<td>F_DATAELEMENTGROUP_PRIVATE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Private Data Element Group Sets</td>
<td>F_DATAELEMENTGROUPSET_PRIVATE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Private Data Set</td>
<td>F_DATASET_PRIVATE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Private Document</td>
<td>F_DOCUMENT_PRIVATE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Private Indicator</td>
<td>F_INDICATOR_PRIVATE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Private Indicator Group</td>
<td>F_INDICATORGROUP_PRIVATE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Private Indicator Group Sets</td>
<td>F_INDICATORGROUPSET_PRIVATE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Private Option Set</td>
<td>F_OPTIONSET_PRIVATE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Private Organisation Unit Group</td>
<td>F_ORGUNITGROUP_PRIVATE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Private Organisation Unit Group Set</td>
<td>F_ORGUNITGROUPSET_PRIVATE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Private Program</td>
<td>F_PROGRAM_PRIVATE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Private Report</td>
<td>F_REPORT_PRIVATE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Private SQL View</td>
<td>F_SQLVIEW_PRIVATE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Private Tracked Entity Attribute</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_ATTRIBUTE_PRIVATE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Private User Group</td>
<td>F_USERGROUP_PRIVATE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Private User Role</td>
<td>F_USERROLE_PRIVATE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Private Validation Rule Group</td>
<td>F_VALIDATIONRULEGROUP_PRIVATE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Program Attribute</td>
<td>F_PROGRAM_ATTRIBUTE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Program Indicator</td>
<td>F_ADD_PROGRAM_INDICATOR</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Program Stage</td>
<td>F_PROGRAMSTAGE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Program Stage Section</td>
<td>F_PROGRAMSTAGE_SECTION_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Public Category Option Group</td>
<td>F_CATEGORY_OPTION_GROUP_PUBLIC_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Public Category Option Group Set</td>
<td>F_CATEGORY_OPTION_GROUP_SET_PUBLIC_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Public Chart</td>
<td>F_CHART_PUBLIC_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Public Dashboard</td>
<td>F_DASHBOARD_PUBLIC_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Public Data Element</td>
<td>F_DATAELEMENT_PUBLIC_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Public Data Element Category</td>
<td>F_CATEGORY_PUBLIC_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Public Data Element Category Combo</td>
<td>F_CATEGORY_COMBO_PUBLIC_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Public Data Element Category Option</td>
<td>F_CATEGORY_OPTION_PUBLIC_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Public Data Element Category Option</td>
<td>F_CATEGORY_OPTION_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Public Data Element Category Option Combo</td>
<td>F_CATEGORY_OPTION_COMBO_PUBLIC_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Public Data Element Groups</td>
<td>F_DATAELEMENTGROUP_PUBLIC_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Public Data Element Group Sets</td>
<td>F_DATAELEMENTGROUPSET_PUBLIC_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Public Data Set</td>
<td>F_DATASET_PUBLIC_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Public Document</td>
<td>F_DOCUMENT_PUBLIC_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Public Indicator</td>
<td>F_INDICATOR_PUBLIC_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Public Indicator Group</td>
<td>F_INDICATORGROUP_PUBLIC_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Public Indicator Group Sets</td>
<td>F_INDICATORGROUPSET_PUBLIC_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Public Option Set</td>
<td>F_OPTIONSET_PUBLIC_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Public Organisation Unit Group</td>
<td>F_ORGUNITGROUP_PUBLIC_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Public Organisation Unit Group Set</td>
<td>F_ORGUNITGROUPSET_PUBLIC_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Public Program</td>
<td>F_PROGRAM_PUBLIC_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Public Report</td>
<td>F_REPORT_PUBLIC_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Public Report Table</td>
<td>F_REPORTTABLE_PUBLIC_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Public SQL View</td>
<td>F_SQLVIEW_PUBLIC_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Public Tracked Entity Attribute</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_ATTRIBUTE_PUBLIC_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Public User Group</td>
<td>F_USERGROUP_PUBLIC_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Public User Role</td>
<td>F_USERROLE_PUBLIC_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Public Validation Rule Group</td>
<td>F_VALIDATIONRULEGROUP_PUBLIC_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Section</td>
<td>F_SECTION_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Tracked Entity</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Tracked Entity Attributes</td>
<td>F_ALLOW_EDIT_TRACKED_ENTITY_ATTRIBUTES</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Tracked Entity Data Value</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_DATAVALUE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Tracked Entity Instance</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_INSTANCE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update User</td>
<td>F_USER_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update User Group Managing Relationships</td>
<td>F_USERGROUP_MANAGING_RELATIONSHIPS_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update User Within Managed Group</td>
<td>F_USER_ADD_WITHIN_MANAGED_GROUP</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add/Update Validation Criteria</td>
<td>F_VALIDATIONCRITERIA_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Add/Update Validation Rule</td>
<td>F_VALIDATIONRULE_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Add Validation Rule Groups</td>
<td>F_VALIDATIONRULEGROUP_ADD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Administrate data mart</td>
<td>F_DATAMART_ADMIN</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Administrate data mart</td>
<td>F_DATA_MART_ADMIN</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Administrate data visualizer</td>
<td>F_DV_ADMIN</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Administrate GIS</td>
<td>F_GIS_ADMIN</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Approve data</td>
<td>F_APPROVE_DATA</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Approve data at lower levels</td>
<td>F_APPROVE_DATA_LOWER_LEVELS</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Archive data</td>
<td>F_ARCHIVE_DATA</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Change GIS Configuration</td>
<td>F_GIS_CONFIGURATION_UPDATE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Change Location of Tracked Entity Instance</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_INSTANCE_CHANGE_LOCATION</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Change order in Data Set</td>
<td>F_DATASET_ORDER_CHANGE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Change system settings</td>
<td>F_SYSTEM_SETTING</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Change Tracked Entity Instance Location</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_CHANGE_LOCATION</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Chart External Access</td>
<td>F_CHART_EXTERNAL</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Concept Management</td>
<td>F_CONCEPT_MANAGEMENT</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Constant Management</td>
<td>F_CONSTANT_MANAGEMENT</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Copy Excel Item</td>
<td>F_COPY_EXCEL_ITEM_ADMINISTRATION</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Create and download backup</td>
<td>F_DASHBOARD_DOWNLOAD_BACKUP</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Data Admin Locking</td>
<td>F_DATAADMIN_LOCK</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Data Admin Unlocking</td>
<td>F_DATAADMIN_UNLOCK</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Delete Attribute</td>
<td>F_ATTRIBUTE_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Delete Category Option Group</td>
<td>F_CATEGORY_OPTION_GROUP_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Delete Category Option Group Set</td>
<td>F_CATEGORY_OPTION_GROUP_SET_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Delete Chart</td>
<td>F_CHART_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Delete Concept</td>
<td>F_CONCEPT_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Delete Constant</td>
<td>F_CONSTANT_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Delete Data Element</td>
<td>F_DATAELEMENT_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Delete Data Element Category</td>
<td>F_CATEGORY_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Delete Data Element Category Combo</td>
<td>F_CATEGORY_COMBO_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Delete Data Element Groups</td>
<td>F_DATAELEMENTGROUP_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Delete Data Element Group Sets</td>
<td>F_DATAELEMENTGROUPSET_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Delete Data Set</td>
<td>F_DATASET_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Delete Data Value</td>
<td>F_DATAVALUE_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Delete Document</td>
<td>F_DOCUMENT_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Delete Excel Template</td>
<td>F_EXCEL_TEMPLATE_MANAGEMENT_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Delete Facility</td>
<td>F_FRED_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Delete Indicator</td>
<td>F_INDICATOR_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Delete Indicator Group</td>
<td>F_INDICATORGROUP_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Delete Indicator Group Sets</td>
<td>F_INDICATORGROUPSET_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Delete Indicator Type</td>
<td>F_INDICATORTYPE_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Delete Locale</td>
<td>F_LOCALE_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Delete Min/max rule</td>
<td>F_DATAELEMENT_MINMAX_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Delete Option Set</td>
<td>F_OPTIONSET_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Delete Organisation Unit</td>
<td>F_ORGANISATIONUNIT_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Delete Organisation Unit Group</td>
<td>F_ORGUNITGROUP_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Delete Organisation Unit Group Set</td>
<td>F_ORGUNITGROUPSET_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Delete Program</td>
<td>F_PROGRAM_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Delete Program Attribute</td>
<td>F_PROGRAM_ATTRIBUTE_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Delete Program Enrollment</td>
<td>F_PROGRAM_INSTANCE_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Delete Program Stage</td>
<td>F_PROGRAMSTAGE_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Delete Program Stage Section</td>
<td>F_PROGRAMSTAGE_SECTION_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Delete Relationship Type</td>
<td>F_RELATIONSHIPTYPE_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Delete Report</td>
<td>F_REPORT_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Delete Report Table</td>
<td>F_REPORTTABLE_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Delete Section</td>
<td>F_SECTION_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Delete SMS</td>
<td>F_MOBILE_DELETE_SMS</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Delete SQL View</td>
<td>F_SQLVIEW_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Delete Tracked Entity</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Delete Tracked Entity Attribute</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_ATTRIBUTE_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Delete Tracked Entity Attribute Value</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_ATTRIBUTEVALUE_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Delete Tracked Entity Data Value</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_DATAVALUE_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Delete Tracked Entity Form</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_FORM_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Delete Tracked Entity Instance</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_INSTANCE_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Delete Tracked Entity Instance Comment</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_COMMENT_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Delete Tracked Entity Instance Visit</td>
<td>F_PROGRAM_STAGE_INSTANCE_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Delete Tracked Entity Relationship</td>
<td>F_RELATIONSHIP_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Delete User</td>
<td>F_USER_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Delete User Group</td>
<td>F_USERGROUP_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Delete User Role</td>
<td>F_USERROLE_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Delete User Within Managed Group</td>
<td>F_USER_DELETE_WITHIN_MANAGED_GROUP</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Delete Validation Criteria</td>
<td>F_VALIDATIONCRITERIA_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Delete Validation Rule</td>
<td>F_VALIDATIONRULE_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Delete Validation Rule Group</td>
<td>F_VALIDATIONRULEGROUP_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Eliminate duplicate data elements</td>
<td>F_ELIMINATE_DUPLICATE_DATA_ELEMENTS</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Excel Reporting Administration</td>
<td>F_EXCEL_REPORT_ADMINISTRATION</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Execute SQL View</td>
<td>F_SQLVIEW_EXECUTE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Export Activity Plan to XLS file</td>
<td>F_ACTIVITY_PLAN_EXPORT</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Export data</td>
<td>F_EXPORT_DATA</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Export events</td>
<td>F_EXPORT_EVENTS</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Export meta-Data</td>
<td>F_METADATA_EXPORT</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Generate Activity Plans</td>
<td>F_GENERATE_ACTIVITY_PLANS</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Generate min-max values</td>
<td>F_GENERATE_MIN_MAX_VALUES</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Generate Program Statistics Report</td>
<td>F_GENERATE_STATISTICAL_PROGRAM_REPORT</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Generate Program Summary Report</td>
<td>F_GENERATE_PROGRAM_SUMMARY_REPORT</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Generate Tracked Entity Tabular report</td>
<td>F_GENERATE_BENEFICIARY_TABULAR_REPORT</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Import data</td>
<td>F_IMPORT_DATA</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Import events</td>
<td>F_IMPORT_EVENTS</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Import from other systems</td>
<td>F_IMPORT_OTHER_SYSTEMS</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Import GML</td>
<td>F_IMPORT_GML</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Import meta-Data</td>
<td>F_METADATA_IMPORT</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Insert custom Java script and CSS</td>
<td>F_INSERT_CUSTOM_JS_CSS</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>List Excel Template</td>
<td>F_EXCEL_TEMPLATE_MANAGEMENT_LIST</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>List Tracked Entity Instance</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_INSTANCE_LIST</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>List User Groups</td>
<td>F_USERGROUP_LIST</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>List User Roles</td>
<td>F_USERROLE_LIST</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Load event reminder messages</td>
<td>F_PROGRAM_STAGE_INSTANCE_REMINDER</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Load Tracked Entity Instance History</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_INSTANCE_HISTORY</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Lock Data Set</td>
<td>F_DATASET_LOCK</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Manage integration routes</td>
<td>F_MANAGE_INTEGRATION_ROUTES</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Manage Program Indicators</td>
<td>F_PROGRAM_INDICATOR_MANAGEMENT</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Manage Program Rule</td>
<td>F_PROGRAM_RULE_MANAGEMENT</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Manage Tracked Entities</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_MANAGEMENT</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Manage Tracked Entity Instance Reminders</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_INSTANCE_REMINDER_MANAGEMENT</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Map External Access</td>
<td>F_MAP_EXTERNAL</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Merge organisation units</td>
<td>F_MERGE_ORGANISATION_UNITS</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Move Organisation Unit</td>
<td>F_ORGANISATIONUNIT_MOVE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Multiple Individual Data Entry</td>
<td>F_NAME_BASED_DATA_ENTRY</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Option Set Management</td>
<td>F_OPTIONSET_MANAGEMENT</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Organisation Unit Registration</td>
<td>F_ORGANISATION_REGISTRATION</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Perform maintenance tasks</td>
<td>F_PERFORM_MAINTENANCE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Program Enrollment</td>
<td>F_PROGRAM_ENROLLMENT</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Program Event Management</td>
<td>F_PROGRAM_INSTANCE_MANAGEMENT</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Program Stage Section Management</td>
<td>F_PROGRAMSTAGE_SECTION_MANAGEMENT</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Program Tracking Management</td>
<td>F_PROGRAM_TRACKING_MANAGEMENT</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Program Un-enrollment</td>
<td>F_PROGRAM_UNENROLLMENT</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Prune organisation units</td>
<td>F_PRUNE_ORGANISATION_UNITS</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Remove Empty Tracked Entity Events</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_REMOVE_EMPTY_EVENTS</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Rename Excel Template file</td>
<td>F_EXCEL_TEMPLATE_MANAGEMENT_RENAME</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Report Table External Access</td>
<td>F_REPORTTABLE_EXTERNAL</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Run validation</td>
<td>F_RUN_VALIDATION</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Scheduling Administration</td>
<td>F_SCHEDULING_ADMIN</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Scheduling case aggregate query builder</td>
<td>F_SCHEDULING_CASE_AGGREGATE_QUERY_BUILDER</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Scheduling send messages</td>
<td>F_SCHEDULING_SEND_MESSAGE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Search Activity Plan</td>
<td>F_ACTIVITY_PLAN</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Search events without registration</td>
<td>F_PROGRAM_STAGE_INSTANCE_SEARCH</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Search events with registration</td>
<td>F_PROGRAM_TRACKING_SEARCH</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Search Tracked Entity Instance</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_INSTANCE_SEARCH</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Search Tracked Entity Instance in All Org Units</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_INSTANCE_SEARCH_IN_ALL_ORGUNITS</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>See API Module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-api</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>See Apps Maintenance module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-maintenance-appmanager</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>See Browser Cache Cleaner module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-cache-cleaner</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>See Dashboard integration module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-dashboard-integration</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>See Dashboard module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-dashboard</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>See Data Administration module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-maintenance-dataadmin</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>See Data Elements and Indicators Maintenance module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-maintenance-datadictionary</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>See Data Entry module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-dataentry</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>See Data Mart module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-datamart</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>See Data Set Maintenance module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-maintenance-dataset</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>See Data Visualizer module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-visualizer</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>See Event Capture module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-event-capture</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>See Event Reports module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-event-reports</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>See Event Visualizer module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-event-visualizer</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>See Excel Report module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-excel-reporting</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>See Export Data Mart Module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-exportdatamart</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>See FRED API Module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-api-fred</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>See GIS module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-gis</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>See GIS module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-mapping</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>See Import-Export module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-importexport</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>See Individual Records</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-caseentry</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>See Light module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-light</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>See Line-listing DataEntry module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-dataentry-national</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>See Mobile Maintenance module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-maintenance-mobile</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>See NRHM Reports module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-reports</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>See Organisation Unit Maintenance module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-maintenance-organisationunit</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>See Pivot Table module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-pivot</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>See Report module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-reporting</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>See Settings Maintenance module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-maintenance-settings</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>See Smartphone module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-mobile</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>See SMS module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-sms</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>See Tracked Entity And Programs module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-maintenance-program</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>See Tracker Capture module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-tracker-capture</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>See User Maintenance module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-maintenance-user</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>See Validation Analysis module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-validationrule-local-in</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>See Validation Rule module</td>
<td>M_dhis-web-validationrule</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Send message</td>
<td>F_SEND_MESSAGE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Send SMS</td>
<td>F_MOBILE_SENDSMS</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Set mobile settings</td>
<td>F_MOBILE_SETTINGS</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Single Event Without Registration Data Entry</td>
<td>F_ANONYMOUS_DATA_ENTRY</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Single Event With Registration Data Entry</td>
<td>F_SINGLE_EVENT_DATA_ENTRY</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Sql View External Access</td>
<td>F_SQLVIEW_EXTERNAL</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Sql View Management</td>
<td>F_SQLVIEW_MANAGEMENT</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Tracked Entity Aggregation</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_AGGREGATION</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Tracked Entity Form Management</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_FORM_MANAGEMENT</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Tracked Entity Instance Dashboard</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_INSTANCE_DASHBOARD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Tracked Entity Instance Management</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_INSTANCE_MANAGEMENT</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Tracked Entity Relationship Management</td>
<td>F_RELATIONSHIP_MANAGEMENT</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Update Facility</td>
<td>F_FRED_UPDATE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Update Organisation Unit Level</td>
<td>F_ORGANISATIONUNITLEVEL_UPDATE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Update Program Rule</td>
<td>F_PROGRAM_RULE_UPDATE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Update Relationship Type</td>
<td>F_RELATIONSHIPTYPE_UPDATE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Update Tracked Entities</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_UPDATE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Update Tracked Entity Attribute</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_ATTRIBUTE_EDIT</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Upload Excel Template</td>
<td>F_EXCEL_TEMPLATE_MAMAGEMENT_UPLOAD</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>View and Search Tracked Entity Attributes and Identifiers</td>
<td>F_ACCESS_TRACKED_ENTITY_ATTRIBUTES</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>View data browser</td>
<td>F_VIEW_DATABROWSER</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>View Program Stage Completeness Report</td>
<td>F_PROGRAM_STAGE_COMPLETENESS</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>View program tracking</td>
<td>F_PROGRAM_TRACKING_LIST</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>View Report</td>
<td>F_REPORT_VIEW</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>View Tracked Entity Attribute</td>
<td>F_TRACKED_ENTITY_ATTRIBUTE_VIEW</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>View unapproved data</td>
<td>F_VIEW_UNAPPROVED_DATA</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>View User</td>
<td>F_USER_VIEW</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>View User Group Managing Relationships</td>
<td>F_USERGROUP_MANAGING_RELATIONSHIPS_VIEW</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>View User Within Managed Group</td>
<td>F_USER_VIEW_WITHIN_MANAGED_GROUP</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Delete tracked entity instance and associated enrollments and events</td>
<td>F_TEI_CASCADE_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Delete enrollment and associated events</td>
<td>F_ENROLLMENT_CASCADE_DELETE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Edit expired data</td>
<td>F_EDIT_EXPIRED</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>



# About sharing of objects { #sharing } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:sharing-->

This chapter discusses the sharing of entities feature in DHIS2.

## Sharing of objects { #sharing-of-objects } 

Many objects in DHIS2, like reports, charts, maps and indicators, can be
shared. DHIS2 supports sharing of metadata or sharing of data. Sharing of
metadata means making an object, like a report, available for reading or
modification to a group of users or to everyone. Sharing of data means
making the actual data captured available to others, and controlling who
can capture that kind of data. For instance for reports, the sharing
dialog can be opened by clicking on the "Sharing settings" button next
to each report in the list. Implementers can use this feature to allow
access to certain objects to only certain user groups. Users can use the
feature to decide who they would like to share objects (such as pivot
tables, charts, dashboards, etc) with.

If sharing is supported for a particular class of objects, a dialog will
be available called "Sharing settings", usually available by clicking on
the name of the object or in the analytics tools, through an icon (Share
with other people). Once you have accessed the sharing settings for the
object you wish to share, a dialog similar to the one below will be
shown.

![](resources/images/maintainence/mtn_sharing_dialog.png)

You can share your report with everyone or with a number of user groups.
"External access" can be enabled to allow this resource to be shared
with everyone, including users which cannot logon to DHIS2. This is
useful for sharing public resources with external systems. Note, that if
objects are shared externally, then they are visible to anyone who has
access to the URL which provides the resource without any login
credentials.

Next to "Public access" you can choose your public access option under
"METADATA": "No access", "Can view only" or "Can edit and view", and
under "DATA": "No access", "Can view data", "Can capture data". Public
access refers to users which are logged into the system. Edit also
implies deleting the report.

To share with a group, simply start typing the name of the group and the
"Search for user groups" input field and select your desired group.
Click on the "+" icon next to the input field to share with that group.
For each group you can set an access option, similar to public access.

Sharing with a user group implies that all users in that group will get
access to the shared object. To create a user group you can go to the
dashboard module and click on "Groups". This will lead you to the list
of groups where you can click "Add new" in the top right corner.
Creating user groups is open for everyone from the dashboard module.

## Metadata sharing and access control { #metadata-sharing-and-access-control } 

The objects which support metadata sharing are indicator, indicator
group, indicator group set, data dictionary, data set, program, standard
report, resource, report table, chart, map and user group. Out of those
objects, report table, chart, map and user group are open for everyone
to create privately. Private means that the objects are available only
to yourself or potentially to a number of user groups if you choose to
share the object. These objects are referred to as "open" objects and
can be created by all users. The remaining objects require that your
user account has the authority to create them. These objects are
referred to as "non-open" objects.

A user can be granted the authority to create publicly accessible
objects or privately accessible objects. In order to create a publicly
accessible object (available for viewing or editing by anyone) your user
account must have the authority to do so. As an example, to create a
publicly accessible chart, your user must have the "Create public chart"
authority granted. The authority to create private objects applies only
to non-open objects. For example, to allow a user to create indicators
which will only be accessible to that user and not to everyone, the user
can be issued with the "Create private indicator" authority.

Sharing a non-open object with another person and let her edit the
object requires that the person's user account has the authority for
updating that type of objects granted. For instance, if you want to let
another person edit your indicator, that person's user account must have
the "Update indicator" authority granted. This does not apply for open
objects.

When you create a new object it will automatically become viewable for
everyone if your user account has the authority to create public
objects. As an example, if you create a standard report and you have the
"Create public standard report" authority granted, the report will
become viewable for everyone. If you do not have that authority granted
the report will be viewable only to yourself. After you have created an
object, you may navigate to the "Sharing settings" dialog and set your
desired access control level.

If you need a user account which is able to view absolutely all objects
you can create a user role with the "ALL" authority and assign a user to
that role. If you need to switch between a "complete" view of objects
and a "personal" view of objects it is recommended to create two user
accounts, one assigned with the "ALL" authority and one without.

## Metadata sharing applied { #metadata-sharing-applied } 

The metadata sharing functionality is useful in several scenarios. One
use-case is setting up a DHIS2 instance for a global organisation with
operations in multiple countries. Typically the organisation has a set
of global data sets, indicators and reports which should apply to all
countries, while all countries will have the need for country-specific
data sets, indicators and reports. In this scenario the following
approach could work:

  - Set up one user group for global personnel.

  - Set up a user group for personnel in each country.

  - Create global data sets and reports, make them viewable for everyone
    and editable for the global user group only.

  - Create country-specific data sets and reports, make them viewable
    and editable for the country user group and the global user group
    only.

This way, the global indicators and reports could be viewed and analysed
by everyone, but maintained by the global user group only. The
country-specific data sets, indicators and reports could be viewed and
maintained by the country and global personnel, without being visible or
impacting the system for other countries in the organisation.

A similar approach could work for a scenario with a donor, multiple
funding agencies and implementing partners in a country, where user
groups could be set up for each of those entities. That way each
implementing partner could create and share their reports within their
organisation without affecting or allowing access to others. Reports
could also be shared with supervisors and funding agencies at the end of
reporting periods.

Another use-case is a country department of health with multiple health
programs. Typically there is a need for having general reports and
charts for the department while allowing the health programs to develop
specific reports and charts for internal use. This can be achieved by
creating user groups for each health program. Later, when developing
reports and charts, these can be made viewable and editable to the
program user group only. This way the reports will not be visible to
other programs and users. This is beneficial because the reports are
kept internal to the program and because the visible list of reports of
other users are kept shorter and more relevant.

## Data sharing and access control { #data-sharing-and-access-control } 

The objects which support data sharing are data set, tracked entity
type, program and program stage. The purpose of data sharing is to
control which users can capture data, and which users can see the data
captured.

### Data sharing for event based programs { #data-sharing-for-event-based-programs } 

Applies to the object types of tracked entity type, program and program
stage. When working with single event programs in event capture, a user
will have to possess the "DATA:Can view data" sharing level to see the
program and its data. Without this sharing level, the program and its
data will not be visible to the user. When working with tracker programs
in tracker capture, the user will need to have "DATA:Can view data" to
both the tracked entity type and program. In case of a tracker program,
the user will also need "DATA:Can view data" on each program stage
individually to be able to see the data within the program. To capture
data the user needs the "DATA:Can capture data" sharing level.

> **Note**
>
> To see and capture data for a program, a data capture user also needs
> to report for an organisation unit to where the program has been
> assigned.

<table>
<caption>Data sharing for tracker programs</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 30%" />
<col style="width: 30%" />
<col style="width: 23%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Object type</th>
<th>Can view data</th>
<th>Can capture data</th>
<th>Comment</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Tracked entity type</strong></p></td>
<td><ul>
<li><p>Search for tracked entities with this tracked entity type.</p></li>
<li><p>See tracked entity type attribute values for this tracked entity type.</p></li>
</ul></td>
<td><ul>
<li><p>Edit visible tracked entity attributes for tracked entity instances of this type.</p></li>
<li><p>Register/create new tracked entity instances of this type.</p></li>
<li><p>Delete tracked entity instances of this type.</p></li>
<li><p>Deactivate/reactivate tracked entity instances of this type.</p></li>
</ul></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Program</strong></p></td>
<td><ul>
<li><p>Search for tracked entities within this program.</p></li>
<li><p>See tracked entity attributes specific to this program.</p></li>
<li><p>See enrollment details for the program.</p></li>
<li><p>See notes for the enrollment.</p></li>
</ul></td>
<td><ul>
<li><p>Enroll into the program.</p></li>
<li><p>Edit enrollment details for the program.</p></li>
<li><p>Complete/reopen enrollments into the program.</p></li>
<li><p>Add notes for the program.</p></li>
<li><p>Edit relationships for the program.</p></li>
<li><p>Send message to tracked entity instance.</p></li>
<li><p>Delete enrollments in the program.</p></li>
</ul></td>
<td><p>Both &quot;Can view data&quot; and &quot;Can capture data&quot; also requires the user to have &quot;Can view data&quot; for the tracked entity type.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Program stage</strong></p></td>
<td><ul>
<li><p>See the program stage and its events and data within an enrollment.</p></li>
<li><p>See the program stage notes.</p></li>
</ul></td>
<td><ul>
<li><p>Add/schedule/refer a new event within the program stage.</p></li>
<li><p>Complete/reopen the events within the program stage.</p></li>
<li><p>Edit tracked entity data values within events in the program stage.</p></li>
<li><p>Add notes for events in the program stage.</p></li>
<li><p>Delete events in the program stage.</p></li>
</ul></td>
<td><p>Both &quot;Can view data&quot; and &quot;Can capture data&quot; also requires the user to have &quot;Can view data&quot; for the program and the tracked entity type.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<caption>Data sharing for single event programs</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 30%" />
<col style="width: 30%" />
<col style="width: 23%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Object type</th>
<th>Can view data</th>
<th>Can capture data</th>
<th>Comment</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Program</strong></p></td>
<td><ul>
<li><p>See list of events within the program.</p></li>
<li><p>See tracked entity data values for events in the program.</p></li>
</ul></td>
<td><ul>
<li><p>Add new events into the program.</p></li>
<li><p>Edit data for events in the program.</p></li>
<li><p>Delete events in the program.</p></li>
</ul></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### Data sharing for data sets { #data-sharing-for-data-sets } 

Applies to the object types of data set and category option . When
working in Data Entry app, the user will need to have "DATA:Can capture
data" to both see and capture data in the data set. To save data for an
entry field in Data Set users need:

1.  Authority: F\_DATAVALUE\_ADD ( Can add data value )

2.  Data Set is shared with "Data: Can capture data"

3.  Data Element is shared with "Metadata: Can View"

4.  All Category Options used by selected Data Set are shared with
    "Data: Can capture data"

> **Note**
>
> To see and capture data for a data set, a data capture user also needs
> to report for an organisation unit to where the data set has been
> assigned.

<table>
<caption>Data sharing for data sets</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 30%" />
<col style="width: 30%" />
<col style="width: 23%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Object type</th>
<th>Can view data</th>
<th>Can capture data</th>
<th>Comment</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Data set</strong></p></td>
<td><ul>
<li><p>View Data Set's data in Analytics</p></li>
</ul></td>
<td><ul>
<li><p>Can see DataSet in Data Entry app</p></li>
<li><p>Can save data for Data Set using API</p></li>
</ul></td>
<td><p>For saving data value in Data Entry app, users also need &quot;Can capture data&quot; for Category Options within selected Data Set.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>CategoryOption</strong></td>
<td><ul>
<li><p>Can view data values belong to shared Category Option in analytics</p></li>
</ul></td>
<td><ul>
<li><p>Can save data value for input fields in Data Entry app which belongs to shared Category Options.</p></li>
</ul></td>
<td>For CategoryOptionCombo and AttributeOptionCombo to be writeable, all belongs CategoryOptions must be shared with &quot;Can capture data&quot;.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>


# Configure the Maps app { #gis_creating } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:gis_creating-->

## Context { #gis_creating_context } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:gis_creating_context-->

Setting up the Maps simply means storing coordinates for the organisation
units you want to show on the map in the database. Coordinates are often
distributed in proprietary formats and will need to be converted to a
format which DHIS2 understands. ESRI shapefiles are the most common
geospatial vector data format for desktop applications. You might find
shapefiles for your country [here](http://www.diva-gis.org/gdata) or in
many other geospatial data repositories on the web. Some amount of work
needs to be done in order to use these coordinates in DHIS2 GIS, namely
transforming the data into a suitable format and ensuring the name which
are contained in the geospatial data match exactly with the names of the
organization units which they should be matched to.

If you go to the organisation unit module and edit one of the units, you
can see a text field called Coordinates. Here you may fill in its
coordinates directly (geojson format) which is useful if you just want
to update a couple of units.

An example point/facility coordinate:

    [29.341,-11.154]

An example polygon/area coordinates
    string:

    [[[[29.343,-11.154],[28.329,-11.342],[28.481,-10.239],[29.833,-10.412]]]]

However, if you are going to e.g. add coordinates for all units at a
certain level you don't want to do that manually. This is where the
automatic GML import comes into play and the following section explains
the preferred way of using it.

> **Important**
>
> The only co-ordinate reference system supported by DHIS2 is EPSG:4326,
> also known as geographic longitude/latitude. Coordinates must be
> stored with the longitude (east/west position) proceeding the latitude
> (north/south position). If your vector data is in a different CRS than
> EPSG 4326, you will need to re-project the data first before importing
> into DHIS2.

## Importing coordinates { #gis_creating_setup } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:gis_creating_setup-->

Step 1 - Simplify/generalize your geographical data

The boundaries in geographical data files are usually very accurate, too
much so for the needs of a web-based GIS. This usually does not affect
the performance when using GIS files on a local system, but it is
usually necessary to optimize the geographical data for the web-based
GIS system of DHIS2. All geographical data needs to be downloaded from
the server and rendered in a browser, so if the data is overly complex,
the performance of the DHIS2 GIS will be negatively impacted. This
optimization process can be described as follows:

Coordinates: The number of significant decimal digits (e.g.
23.02937874993774) should be shortened to fewer digits (e.g. 23.03).
Although this will result in some inaccuracies on the map, given the
usual scale at which maps in DHIS2 are produced (\> 1:50,000), the loss
of precision should not be noticeable. Normally, no more than four
significant digits after the decimal point should be necessary.,
Polygons: In addition to shortening the number of significant digits,
the actual number of points should also be reduced to an optimal level.
Finding this optimal level may take a bit of experimentation. Decreasing
the precision of the points as well as the number of points through
generalization, will lead to degradation of the polygon. However, after
a bit of experimentation, an optimal level of generalization can be
found, where the accuracy of the polygon is visually acceptable, and the
performance of the GIS is optimal.

For polygons, we need to make the boundary lines less detailed by
removing some of the line points. Make a backup of your shapefiles
before you start. One possible method is the use of
[MapShaper](http://www.mapshaper.org/) which is an online tool which can
be used to generalize geographical data. To use MapShaper, simply upload
your shapefile to the site. Then, at the centre bottom you see a slider
that starts at 0%. It is usually acceptable to drag it up to about 80%.
In the left menu you can check "show original lines" to compare the
result and you may want to give a different simplification method a try.
When you are happy with the result, click "export" in the top right
corner. Then check the first of the four options called "Shapefile -
polygons", click "create" and wait for the download buttons to appear.
Now, download the two files to your local computer and overwrite the
existing ones. Move on to the next step with your new simplified
shapefile.

Step 2 - Convert the shapefile to GML

The recommended tool for geographical format conversions is called
"ogr2ogr". This should be available for most Linux distributions `sudo
apt-get install
gdal-bin`. For Windows, go to <http://fwtools.maptools.org/>and download
"FWTools", install it and open up the FWTools command shell. During the
format conversion we also want to ensure that the output has the correct
coordinate projection (called EPSG:4326 with geographic longitude and
latitude). For a more detailed reference of geographic coordinates,
please refer to this [site](http://www.epsg-registry.org/). If you have
already reprojected the geographic data to the geographic
latitude/longitude (EPSG:4326) system, there is no need to explicitly
define the output coordinate system, assuming that `ogr2ogr` can
determine the input spatial reference system. Note that most shapefiles
are using the EPSG:4326 system. You can determine the spatial reference
system by executing the following command.

    ogrinfo -al -so filename.shp

Assuming that the projection is reported to be EPSG:27700 by `ogrinfo`,
we can transform it to EPSG:4326 by executing the following
    command.

    ogr2ogr -s_srs EPSG:27700 -t_srs EPSG:4326 -f GML filename.gml filename.shp

If the geographic data is already in EPSG:4326, you can simply transform
the shapefile to GML by executing the following command.

    ogr2ogr -f GML filename.gml filename.shp

You will find the created GML file in the same folder as the shapefile.

Step 3 - Prepare the GML file

Unfortunately, the GML file is not ready for importation yet. Open it in
a robust text editor like Geany (Linux) or Notepad++ (Windows). GML is
an XML based format which means that you will recognize the regular XML
tag hierarchy. In the GML file an organisation unit is represented as a
\<gml:featureMember\>. Inside the feature members we usually find a lot
of attributes, but we are just going to import their coordinates.

In order to import geospatial data from the feature members of the GML
input, DHIS2 must match each of them with an organisation unit in its
database. The feature member element must, in other words, contain a
reference to its corresponding organisation unit. The reference itself
must be one of three possible DHIS2 identifiers: **uid**, **code** or
**name**. The identifier of choice must be provided as a property for
each feature member element. The importer will look for a property with
the local name of either *Uid*, *Code* or *Name*, e.g. "ogr:Name" or
"anyPrefix:Code".

If your feature members already contain a property of the identifier you
wish to use (such as the name of an area) you can use search and replace
in a text editor to rename these elements to a name DHIS2 will recognize
(see the below table). This is typically a workflow which is applicable
when using the name as the identifier (the source shapefile or even GML
will usually contain the name for each area it defines).

<table>
<caption>Organisation unit identifiers supported for GML import</caption>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Matching priority</th>
<th>Identifier</th>
<th>Valid spellings</th>
<th>Guaranteed unique</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>1</td>
<td>Uid</td>
<td>uid, Uid, UID</td>
<td>Yes</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>2</td>
<td>Code</td>
<td>code, Code, CODE</td>
<td>No</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>3</td>
<td>Name</td>
<td>name, Name, NAME</td>
<td>No</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

In the case of renaming properties one would usually find a tag named
something like "ogr:DISTRICT\_NAME", "ogr:NAME\_1" and rename it to
"ogr:Name". If using the *code* or *uid* identifiers on the other hand,
looking up the correct values in the DHIS2 database and going through
the GML file, adding the properties for each corresponding feature
member might be necessary. In any of the cases it is important to
realize that the identifier used must **uniquely** identify an
organisation unit (e.g. if there are two organisation units in the
database of the same name or code, these cannot be matched properly on
either). As *uid* is the only guaranteed-to-be-unique identifier it is
the most robust choice. However, as matching on name is usually easier
(given that the name is already part of your data), a viable approach to
solving uniqueness conflicts can be to match any non-uniquely named
organisation units on a different identifier (uid, preferably) and the
rest on their names.

As can be seen in the above table there is a matching priority, meaning
is any two or more identifiers are provided for the same feature member,
matching will be performed on the highest priority identifier. Note also
the valid properties which can be used in you GML. The namespace prefix
is not important as only the local name is used.

A common pitfall of performing preparation of the GML files is syntax-
or element naming errors. Therefore please make sure that all properties
of the GML file are started and terminated with correctly corresponding
tags. Also make sure the properties follow either of the given valid
spellings of the property name. The identifying properties are supposed
to look like e.g. \<ogr:Name\>Moyamba District\</ogr:Name\>,
\<somePrefix:uid\>x7uuia898nJ\</somePrefix:uid\> or
\<CODE\>OU\_12345\</CODE\>. Another common error is not making sure the
identifier matches exactly, especially when using the *name* property.
All matches are performed on exact values, meaning that "Moyamba" in a
source GML file would not be matched against "Moyamba District" in the
database.

Have a brief look at the identifiers and compare them to the
corresponding values in the database. If they seem to match fairly good,
it is about time to do a preview in the import-export module.

Go to Services -\> Import-Export, select "Preview", select the GML file
and click "Import". Look for new/updated organisation units. Our
intention is to add coordinates to already existing organisation units
in the database, so we want as many updates as possible and 0 new. Those
listed as new will be created as root units and mess up the organisation
unit trees in DHIS2. If any listed as new, click the number and the
organisation units in question will appear in the list below. If there
are any slight misspellings compared to the organisation unit names in
the database - fix them and do the preview again. Otherwise, click the
"discard all" button below the list and then the "Import all" button
above the list.

If the import process completes successfully, you should now be able to
utilize the geographical data in the DHIS2 GIS. If not, check the log
for hints and look for common errors such as:

\- Name duplicates in the GML file. The name column in the database is
unique and does not accept two organisation units with the same name.

\- The "shortname" column in the organisationunit table in your database
has a too small varchar definition. Increase it to 100.

\- Special name characters in the GML file. Be sure to convert these to
appropriate XML equivalents or escape sequences.

\- Wrongly formatted input GML, non-matching tags


# Configure report functionality { #setting_up_reporting } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:setting_up_reporting-->

## Data sources for reporting { #reporting_data_sources } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:reporting_data_sources-->

### Types of data and aggregation { #types-of-data-and-aggregation } 

In the bigger picture of HIS terminology all data in DHIS2 are usually
called aggregated as they are aggregates (e.g. monthly summaries) of
medical records or some kind of service registers reported from the
health facilities. Aggregation inside DHIS2 however, which is the topic
here, is concerned with how the raw data captured in DHIS2 (through data
entry or import)are further aggregated over time (e.g. from monthly to
quarterly values) or up the organisational hierarchy (e.g. from facility
to district values).

#### Terminology { #terminology } 

  - *Raw data* refers to data that is registered into the DHIS2 either
    through data entry or data import, and has not been manipulated by
    the DHIS2 aggregation process. All these data are stored in the
    table (or Java object if you prefer) called DataValue.

  - *Aggregated data* refers to data that has been aggregated by the
    DHIS2, meaning it is no longer raw data, but some kind of aggregate
    of the raw data.

  - *Indicator values* can also be understood as aggregated data, but
    these are special in the way that they are calculated based on user
    defined formulas (factor \* numerator/denominator). Indicator values
    are therefore processed data and not raw data, and are located in
    the aggregatedindicatorvalue table/object. Indicators are calculated
    at any level of the organisational hierarchy and these calculations
    are then based on the aggregated data values available at each
    level. A level attribute in the aggregateddatavalue table refers to
    the organisational level of the orgunit the value has been
    calculated for.

  - *Period and Period type* are used to specify the time dimension of
    the raw or aggregated values, and data can be aggregated from one
    period type to another, e.g. from monthly to quarterly, or daily to
    monthly. Each data value has one period and that period has one
    period type. E.g. data values for the periods Jan, Feb, and Mar
    2009, all of the monthly period type can be aggregated together to
    an aggregated data value with the period Q1 2009 and period type
    Quarterly.

#### Basic rules of aggregation { #basic-rules-of-aggregation } 

##### What is added together { #what-is-added-together } 

Data (raw) can be registered at any organisational level, e.g. at
national hospital at level 2, a health facility at level 5, or at a
bigger PHC at level 4. This varies form country to country, but DHIS2 is
flexible in allowing data entry or data import to take place at any
level. This means that orgunits that themselves have children can
register data, sometimes the same data elements as their children units.
The basic rule of aggregation in DHIS2 is that *all raw data is
aggregated together*, meaning data registered at a facility on level 5
is added to the data registered for a PHC at level 4.

It is up to the user/system administrator/designer to make sure that no
duplication of data entry is taking place and that e.g. data entered at
level 4 are not about the same services/visits that are reported by
orgunit children at level 5. 

> **NOTE**
>
> In some cases you want to have
duplication of data in the system, but in a controlled manner. E.g. when
you have two different sources of data for population estimates, both
level 5 catchment population data and another population data source for
level 4 based on census data (because sum of level 5 catchments is not
always the same as level 4 census data). Then you can specify using
advanced aggregation settings (see further down) that the system should
e.g. not add level 5 population data to the level 4 population data, and
that level 3,2,1 population data aggregates are only based on level 4
data and does not include level 5 data.

##### How data gets added together { #how-data-gets-added-together } 

How data is aggregated depends on the dimension of aggregation (see
further down).

Along the orgunit level dimension data is always summed up; i.e. simply added
together. Note that raw data is never percentages, and therefore can be
summed together. Indicator values that can be percentages are treated
differently (re-calculated at each level, never summed up).

Along the time dimension there are several possibilities, the two most
common ways to aggregate are sum and average. The user can specify for
each data element which method to use by setting the aggregation
operator (see further down). Monthly service data are normally summed
together over time, e.g. the number of vaccines given in a year is the
sum of the vaccines given for each month of that year. For population,
equipment, staff and other kind of what is often called semi-permanent
data the average method is often the one to use, as, e.g. 'number of
nurses' working at a facility in a year would not be the sum of the two
numbers reported in the six-monthly staffing report, but rather the
average of the two numbers. More details further down under 'aggregation
operators'.

#### Dimensions of aggregation { #dimensions-of-aggregation } 

##### Organisational units and levels { #organisational-units-and-levels } 

Organisational units are used to represent the 'where' dimension
associated with data values. In DHIS2, organisational units are arranged
in a hierarchy, which typically corresponds to the hierarchical nature
of the organisation or country. Organisational unit levels correspond to
the distinct levels within the hierarchy. For instance, a country may be
organized into provinces, then districts, then facilities, and then
sub-centres. This organisational hierarchy would have five levels.
Within each level, a number of organisational units would exist. During
the aggregation process, data is aggregated from the lower
organisational unit levels to higher levels. Depending on the
aggregation operator, data may be 'summed' or 'averaged' within a given
organisational unit level, to derive the aggregate total for all the
organisational units that are contained within a higher level
organisational unit level. For instance, if there are ten districts
contained in a province and the aggregation operator for a given data
element has been defined as 'SUM', the aggregate total for the province
would be calculated as the sum of the values of the individual ten
districts contained in that province.

##### Period { #period } 

Periods are used to represent the 'when' dimension associated with data
values. Data can easily be aggregated from weeks to months, from months
to quarters, and from quarters to years. DHIS2 uses known rules of how
these different intervals are contained within other intervals (for
instance Quarter 1 2010 is known to contain January 2010, February 2010
an March 2010) in order to aggregate data from smaller time intervals,
e.g. weeks, into longer time intervals, e.g. months.

##### Data Elements and Categories { #data-elements-and-categories } 

The data element dimension specifies 'what' is being recorded by a
particular data value. Data element categories are actually degenerated
dimensions of the data element dimension, and are used to disaggregate
the data element dimension into finer categories. Data element
categories, such as 'Age' and 'Gender', are used to record a particular
data element, typically for different population groups. These
categories can then be used to calculate the overall total for the
category and the total of all categories.

#### Aggregation operators, methods for aggregation { #aggregation-operators-methods-for-aggregation } 

##### Sum { #sum } 

The 'sum' operator simply calculates the sum of all data values that are
contained within a particular aggregation matrix. For instance, if data
is recorded on a monthly basis at the district level and is aggregated
to provincial quarterly totals, all data contained in all districts for
a given province and all weeks for the given quarter will be added
together to obtain the aggregate total.

##### Average { #average } 

When the average aggregation operator is selected, the unweighted
average of all data values within a given aggregation matrix are
calculated.

It is important to understand how DHIS2 treats null values in the
context of the average operator. It is fairly common for some
organisational units not to submit data for certain data elements. In
the context of the average operator, the average results from the number
of data elements that are actually present (therefore NOT NULL) within a
given aggregation matrix. If there are 12 districts within a given
province, but only 10 of these have submitted data, the average
aggregate will result from these ten values that are actually present in
the database, and will not take into account the missing values.

#### Advanced aggregation settings (aggregation levels) { #advanced-aggregation-settings-aggregation-levels } 

##### Aggregation levels { #aggregation-levels } 

The normal rule of the system is to aggregate all raw data together when
moving up the organisational hierarchy, and the system assumes that data
entry is not being duplicated by entering the same services provided to
the same clients at both facility level and also entering an
'aggregated' (sum of all facilities) number at a higher level. This is
to more easily facilitate aggregation when the same services are
provided but to different clients/catchment populations at facilities on
level 5 and a PHC (the parent of the same facilities) at level 4. In
this way a facility at level 5 and a PHC at level 4 can share the same
data elements and simply add together their numbers to provide the total
of services provided in the geographical area.

Sometimes such an aggregation is not desired, simply because it would
mean duplicating data about the same population. This is the case when
you have two different sources of data for two different orgunit levels.
E.g. catchment population for facilities can come from a different
source than district populations and therefore the sum of the facility
catchment populations do not match the district population provided by
e.g. census data. If this is the case we would actually want duplicated
data in the system so that each level can have as accurate numbers as
possible, but then we do NOT want to aggregate these data sources
together.

In the Data Element section you can edit data elements and for each of
them specify how aggregation is done for each level. In the case
described above we need to tell the system NOT to include facility data
on population in any of the aggregations above that level, as the level
above, in this case the districts have registered their population
directly as raw data. The district population data should then be used
at all levels above and including the district level, while facility
level should use its own data.

##### How to edit data element aggregation { #how-to-edit-data-element-aggregation } 

This is controlled through something called aggregation levels and at
the end of the edit data element screen there is a tick-box called
Aggregation Levels. If you tick that one you will see a list of
aggregation levels, available and selected. Default is to have no
aggregation levels defined, then all raw data in the hierarchy will be
added together. To specify the rule described above, and given a
hierarchy of Country, Province, District, Facility: select Facility and
District as your aggregation levels. Basically you select where you have
data. Selecting Facility means that Facilities will use data from
facilities (given since this is the lowest level). Selecting District
means that the District level raw data will be used when aggregating
data for District level (hence no aggregation will take place at that
level), and the facility data will not be part of the aggregated
District values. When aggregating data at Province level the District
level raw data will be used since this is the highest available
aggregation level selected. Also for Country level aggregates the
District raw data will be used. Just to repeat, if we had not specified
that District level was an aggregation level, then the facility data and
district data would have been added together and caused duplicate
(double) population data for districts and all levels above.

### Resource tables { #resource-tables } 

Resource tables provide additional information about the dimensions of
the data in a format that is well suited for external tools to combine
with the data value table. By joining the data value table with these
resource tables one can easily aggregate along the data element category
dimension or data element/indicator/organisation unit groups dimensions.
E.g. by tagging all the data values with the category option male or
female and provide this in a separate column 'gender' one can get
subtotals of male and female based on data values that are collected for
category option combinations like (male, \<5) and (male,\>5). See the
Pivot Tables section for more examples of how these can be used.
orgunitstructure is another important table in the database that helps
to provide the hierarchy of orgunits together with the data. By joining
the orgunitstructure table with the data values table you can get rows
of data values with the full hierarchy, e.g. on the form: OU1, OU2, OU3,
OU4, DataElement, Period, Value (Sierra Leone, Bo, Badija, Ngelehun CHC,
BCG \<1, Jan-10, 32) This format makes it much easier for e.g. pivot
tables or other OLAP tools to aggregate data up the hierarchy.

### Report tables { #reportTable } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:reportTable-->

Report tables are defined, cross-tabulated reports which can be used as
the basis of further reports, such as Excel Pivot Tables or simply
downloaded as an Excel sheet. Report tables are intended to provide a
specific view of data which is required, such as "Monthly National ANC
Indicators". This report table might provide all ANC indicators for a
country, aggregated by month for the entire country. This data could of
course be retrieved from the main datamart, but report tables generally
perform faster and present well defined views of data to users.

## How to create report tables { #reporting_creating_tables } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:reporting_creating_tables-->

To create a new report table, go to the Report tables section of the
Reports module (Reports -\> Report Table). Above the list of standard
reports, use the "Add report table" or "Add Dataelement Dimension Table"
buttons. A regular report table can be used to hold data on data
elements, indicators or dataset completeness, while Dataelement
dimension tables are used to include data element categories in report
tables. Creating the tables are done in the same way, however, the only
exception being when choosing data.

To create a report table, you start by making some general choices for
the table, the most important of which is the crosstab dimension. Then,
you choose which data elements, indicators, datasets or data element
dimensions you want to include. Finally you select which organisation
units and time periods to use in the report table. Each of these steps
are described in detail below.

### General options { #reporting_general_options } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:reporting_general_options-->


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/general_options.jpg)

**Cross tab dimensions**

You can cross-tab one or more of the following dimensions: data
element/indicator, orgunit, and period, which means that columns will be
created based on the values of the dimensions chosen, e.g. if indicators
is selected you will get column names in the table reflecting the names
of the selected indicators.

For example, if you cross-tab on indicators and periods, the column
headers will say "\<indicator title\> \<period\>". The organisation
units will be listed as rows. See screenshot for clarification:

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/crosstab_ind-per.jpg)

If you cross-tab on indicators and organisation units, the column
headers of the table will say "\<indicator title\> \<organisation
unit\>". Now the periods will be listed as rows. See screenshot for
clarification:

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/crosstab_ind-org.jpg)

Note that the options made here regarding crosstab dimensions may have
consequences for what options are available when using the report table
as a data source later, for example for standard reports.

**Sort order**

Affects the rightmost column in the table, allows you to choose to sort
it low to high or high to low.

**Top limit**

Top limit allow you to set a maximum number of rows you want to include
in the report table.

**Include regression**

This adds additional columns with regression values that can be included
in the report design, e.g. in line charts.

### Selecting data { #reporting_selecting_data } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:reporting_selecting_data-->


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/select_data.jpg)

**Indicators/Data elements**

Here you select the data elements/indicators that you want to include in
the report. Use the group filter to more easily find what you are
looking for and double click on the items you want to include, or use
the buttons to add/remove elements. You can have both data elements and
indicators in the same report.

**Data sets**

Here you select the data sets that you want to include in the report.
Including a data set will give you data on the data completeness of the
given set, not data on its data elements. Double click on the items you
want to include, or use the buttons.

### Selecting report parameters { #selecting_reporting_params } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:selecting_reporting_params-->


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/relative_options.jpg)

There are two ways to select both what organisation units to include in
a report, and what time periods should be included: relative, or fixed.
Fixed organisation units and/or periods means that you select the
units/periods to include in the report table when you create the report
table. Using relative periods, you can select the time and/or units as
parameters when the report table is populated, for example when running
a standard report or creating a chart. A combination is also possible,
for example to add some organisation units in the report permanently
while letting the users choose additional. Report parameters is
discussed below. In general, using fixed organisation units and/or time
periods are an unnecessary restriction.

**Fixed Organisation Units**

To add fixed organisation units, click "Toggle fixed organisation
units". A panel will appear where you can choose orgunits to always
include in the report. If you leave it blank, the users select orgunits
when running the report through the use of report parameters. Use the
drop down menu to filter organisation units by level, double click or
use the buttons to add/remove.

**Fixed Periods**

To add fixed periods, click "Toggle fixed organisation units". A panel
will appear where you can choose periods to always include in the
report. If you leave it blank, the users select periods when running the
report through the use of report parameters. Use the drop down menu to
choose period type (week, month, etc), the Prev and Next button to
choose year, and double click or use the buttons to add/remove.

**Relative periods**

Instead of using fixed/static periods like 'Jan-2010' or 'Q1-2010', more
generic periods can be used to create reusable report tables, e.g. for
monthly reports the period 'Reporting month' will simply pick the
current reporting month selected by the user when running the report.
Note that all relative periods are relative to a "reporting month". The
reporting month is either selected by the users, otherwise the current
month is used. Here is a description of the possible relative periods:

  - *Reporting month:*

    Use this for monthly reports. The month selected in the reporting
    month parameter will be used in the report.

  - *Months/Quarters this year*:

    This will provide one value per month or quarter in the year. This
    is well suited for standard monthly or quarterly reports where all
    month/quarters need to be listed. Periods that still have no data
    will be empty, but will always keep the same column name.

  - *This year:*

    This is the cumulative so far in the year, aggregating the periods
    from the beginning of the year up to and including the selected
    reporting month.

  - *Months/Quarters last year*:

    This will provide one value per month or quarter last year, relative
    to the reporting month. This is well suited for standard monthly or
    quarterly reports where all month/quarters need to be listed.
    Periods that still have no data will be empty, but will always keep
    the same column name.

  - *Last year:*

    This is the cumulative last year, relative to the reporting month,
    aggregating all the periods from last year.

**Example - relative periods**

Let's say we have chosen three indicators: A, B and C, and we have also
chosen to use the relative periods 'Reporting month' and 'This year'
when we created the report table. If the reporting month (selected
automatically or by the user) is for example May 2010, the report table
will calculate the values for the three selected indicators for May 2010
(= the 'Reporting month') and the accumulated values for the three
selected indicators so far in 2010 (= so far 'This year').

Thus, we will end up with six values for each of the organisation units:
"Indicator A May 2010", "Indicator B May 2010" "Indicator C May 2010",
"Indicator A so far in 2010", "Indicator B so far in 2010" and
"Indicator C so far in 2010".

**Report parameters**

Report parameters make the reports more generic and reusable over time
and for different organisation units. These parameters will pop up when
generating the report table or running a report based on the report
table. The users will select what they want to see in the report. There
are four possible report parameters, and you can select none, all, or
any combination.

  - *Reporting month:*

    This decides which month will be used when the system is choosing
    the relative periods. If the box it not checked, the user will not
    be asked for the reporting month when the report is generated - the
    current month will then be used.

  - *Grand parent organisation unit:*

    Select the grand parent of all the orgunit children and grand
    children you want listed in the report. E.g. a selected region will
    trigger the use of the region itself, all its district, and all
    their sub-districts.

  - *Parent organisation unit:*

    Select the parent of all the orgunit children you want listed in the
    report. E.g. a selected district will trigger the use of the
    district itself and all its children/sub-districts.

  - *Organisation unit:*

    This triggers the use of this orgunit in the report. No children are
    listed.

**Example - report parameters**

Continuing with the example on relative periods just above, let's say
that in addition to 'Reporting month', we have chosen 'Parent
organisation unit' as a report parameter when we created the report
table. When we're running the report table, we will be asked to select
an organisation unit. Now, let's say we choose "Region R" as the
organisation unit. "Region R" has the children "District X" and
"District Y".

When the report is run, the system will aggregate data for both
"District X" and "District Y". The data will be aggregated from the
lowest level where they have been collected. The values for the
districts will be aggregated further to give an aggregated value for
"Region R".

Thus, the report table will generate the six values presented in the
previous example, for "District X", "District Y" and "Region R".

### Data element dimension tables { #reporting_de_dimension_tables } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:reporting_de_dimension_tables-->

These tables enable the use of data element categories in report tables.
There are two differences from regular report tables. The first is that
it is not possible to select crosstab dimensions, as the columns will
always be the disaggregations from the category combinations. The other
is the actual choice of data. Only one category combination can be added
per report, and only data elements from the same category combo can be
selected.

Subtotals and the total will also be included in the table, e.g. a
gender (male, female) + EPI age(\<1, \>1) category combo would give the
following columns: male+\<1, male+\>1, Female+\<1, female+\>1, male,
female,\<1, \>1, total.

**Selecting data**


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/catcombo.jpg)

Use the drop down menu to choose category combinations. The data
elements using this category combination will be listed. Double click to
add to the report, or use the buttons.

### Report table - best practices { #reporting_best_practices } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:reporting_best_practices-->

To make the report tables reusable over time and across orgunits they
can have parameters. Four types of parameters are allowed; orgunit,
parent orgunit (for listing of orgunits in one area), grand parent
orgunit and reporting month. As a side note it can be mentioned that we
are looking into expanding this to include reporting quarter and year,
or to make that period parameter more generic with regard to period type
somehow. The ability to use period as a parameter makes the report table
reusable over time and as such fits nicely with report needs such as
monthly, quarterly or annual reports. When a report is run by the user
in DHIS2, the user must specify the values for the report tables that
are linked to the report. First the report table is re-generated
(deleted and re-created with updated data), and then the report is run
(in the background, in Jasper report engine).

Report tables can consist of values related to data elements, indicators
or data completeness, which is related to completeness of reporting
across orgunits for a given month. Completeness reports will be covered
in a separate section.

There are three dimensions in a report table that identify the data;
indicators or data elements, orgunits and periods. For each of these
dimensions the user can select which metadata values to include in the
report. The user must select one or more data elements or indicators to
appear in the report. The orgunit selection can be substituted with a
parameter, either one specific orgunit or an orgunit parent (making
itself and all its children appear in the report). If one or more
orgunits are selected and no orgunit parameter is used, then the report
is static with regard to which orgunits to include, which in most cases
is an unnecessary restriction to a report.

**Using relative periods**

The period selection is more advanced as it can in addition to specific
periods like Jan-09, Q1-08, 2007 also contain what is called relative
periods. As report usually is run routinely over time a specific period
like Jan-09 is not very useful in a report. Instead, if you want to
design a monthly report, you should use the relative period called
Reporting Month. Then you must also include Reporting Month as one of
your report parameters to let the system know what exactly is the
Reporting Month on the time of report generation. There are many other
relative periods available, and they all relate to the report parameter
Reporting Month. E.g. the relative period called So far this year refers
to the accumulative value for the year incl. the Reporting Month. If you
want a trend report with multiple periods in stead of one aggregated
period, you can select e.g. 'Months this year', which would give you
values for each month so far in the year. You can do a similar report
with quarters. The idea is to support as many generic report types as
possible using relative periods, so if you have other report needs,
please suggest new relative periods on the mailing list, and they might
be added to the report table options.

**Cross-tabbing dimensions**

Cross tabbing is a very powerful functionality in report design, as the
typical DHIS2 data table with references to period, data
element/indicator and orgunit makes more advanced report design very
difficult, as you cannot put e.g. specific indicators, periods or
orgunits on specific columns. E.g. by cross-tabbing on the indicator
dimension in an indicator report table you will get the indicator names
on the column headers in your report, in addition to a column
referencing orgunit, and another column referencing period. With such a
table design you could drag and drop indicator names to specific columns
or chart positions in the iReport software. Similarly you can cross tab
on orgunits or periods to make their names specifically available to
report design. E.g. by cross-tabbing on periods and selecting the two
relative periods 'Reporting month' and 'This year', you can design
reports with both the last month and the accumulative annual value for
given month as they will be available as column headers in your report
table. It is also possible to combine two dimensions in cross-tabbing,
e.g. period and indicator, which makes it possible to e.g. look at three
selected indicators for two specific relative periods. This would e.g.
make it possible to make a table or chart based report with BCG, DPT3
and Measles coverage, both for the last month and the accumulative
coverage so far in the year.

All in all, by combining the functionality of cross tabbing, relative
periods and report table parameters you should have a tool to support
most report scenarios. If not, we would be very happy to receive
suggestions to further improvements to report tables. As already
mentioned, we have started to look at more fine-grained parameters for
the period dimension as the 'Reporting month' does not cover enough, or
at least is not intuitive enough, when it comes to e.g. quarterly
reports.

## Report table outcome { #reporting_table_outcomes } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:reporting_table_outcomes-->

When the report table is run, the system will calculate values for
specified indicators/data elements/data sets, orgunits and periods. The
data will be presented in DHIS2 in a table layout. The column headers
will correspond to the cross-tab dimension you have selected. An example
report table showing ANC coverage for a district in The Gambia, is shown
below. Here the indicator and the periods are cross-tabbed, as can be
seen from the column headers.


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/crosstab_ind-per.jpg)

Above the table there are six buttons; five download buttons and one
Back button. Clicking the Back button will simply take you back to the
previous screen. The function of the five download buttons, are
presented below the screenshot:

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/report-table_output.png)

**The five download buttons**

  - *Download as Excel:*

    Downloads a generated Excel file you can open in Excel.

  - *Download as CSV:*

    Downloads a generated .csv file. CSV stands for **C**omma
    **S**eparated **V**alues. It's a text file with the file ending
    .csv. Each line in the file corresponds to a row in the table, while
    the columns are separated with semi colons (;). The file can be
    opened in a text editor as well as in a spread sheet program (such
    as Excel).

  - *Download as PDF:*

    Downloads a generated PDF file. The data will be presented in a
    similar layout as the generated table you are already viewing in
    DHIS2.

  - *Download as Report:*

    Downloads a "styled" PDF file. In addition to present the data in a
    table layout, this file also presents a chart, showing the
    aggregated data from all the chosen periods and the parent
    organisation unit chosen for the report table. The report is
    generated using the Jasper report engine.

  - *Download as JRXML:*

    Downloads the design file for the generated Report described in the
    previous bullet. The design file (with the file ending .jrxml) can
    be opened in the Jasper iReport Designer software. If you plan to
    design standard reports, this is the starting point.

## Standard reports { #reporting_standard_reports } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:reporting_standard_reports-->

### What is a standard report? { #what-is-a-standard-report } 

A standard report is a manually designed report that presents data in a
manually specified layout. Standard reports can be based either on
report tables or SQL queries. Both approaches are described in the
following sections. The main advantage of using report tables is that of
simplicity - no special development skills are required. In cases where
you have special requirements or need to utilize additional parts of the
DHIS2 database you might want to use a SQL based standard report. In any
case you will be able to utilize report parameters in order to create
dynamic reports. The following guide will use the report table approach,
while the SQL approach is covered towards the end.

### Designing Standard reports in iReport { #designing-standard-reports-in-ireport } 

Jasper iReport Designer is a tool for creating reports that can be used
as Standard Reports in DHIS2. The tool allows for the creation of
standard report templates that can easily be exported from DHIS2 with up
to date data. The process of creating reports involves four major steps:

1.  A report table must be created in DHIS2 with the indicators/data
    elements/datasets to be used in the report.

2.  You have to run the report table and download the design file (Click
    the "Download as JRXML" button).

3.  Open the downloaded .jrxml file using the free software Jasper
    iReport Designer to edit the layout of the report.

4.  The edited report can then be uploaded to DHIS2 to be used as a
    standard report.

If you want to preview your report during the design in iReport, you
actually have to upload your file to DHIS2 to see how it looks.

These four steps will be describe in detail in the coming sections. In
general, when you are making standard reports you should have a clear
idea of how it should look before you even make the report table, as how
the report table is designed has implications for how the report can be
formatted in iReport. For example, what crosstab dimensions are selected
in the report table has consequences for what crosstabs are available
for the standard report, and it has consequences for what types of
charts you can make.

#### Download and open the design file { #download-and-open-the-design-file } 

> **NOTE**
>
> If you have not created a report table yet, you have to do so.
> See section "How to create report tables" to do so.*

Locate your desired report table and run it by clicking the green circle
with a white arrow inside. When the report is shown, click the "Download
as JRXML" button to download the design file. Then open that file in the
Jasper iReport Designer software.

#### Editing the report { #editing-the-report } 

You are now ready to edit the layout of the report. The main iReport
window consists of a "Report Inspector" to the left, the report document
in the middle, a "Palette" area on the upper right hand side and a
"Properties" area on the lower right hand side. The "Report Inspector"
are used for selecting and examining the various properties of the
report, and when selecting an item in the inspector, the "Properties"
panel changes to display properties relating to the selection. The
"Palette" is used for adding various elements, e.g. text boxes, images
and charts to the
document.


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireport/iReport-window.png)

> **NOTE**
>
> If you cannot see the Palette or Properties sidebar, you can
> enable them from the menu item called "Window" on the menu bar.

The iReport document is divided into seven main bands, divided by layout
separators (the blue lines). These lines are used to decide how big each
of the areas should be on the report.

The areas all have different purposes:

  - Title - area for the title of the report

  - Page header - area for the page header

  - Column header - area for column headers (for the table)

  - Detail 1 - area where the actual report data will be placed

  - Column footer - area to make footer of the table

  - Page footer - area for the page footer

  - Summary - elements in this area will be placed at the end of the
    report

By default you will see that only the Title, Column Header and the
Detail 1 bands have data. For most reports this is OK. The Title band is
suitable for a title and e.g. a chart. Data fields entered into the
Detail 1 area will be iterated over to create a table. For example, if a
field called "dataelementname" is placed in the Detail 1 band, all data
elements in the report table will be listed here. We'll come back to
data fields management just a little below.

The unused bands in the report are contracted to add more space for your
report data. You can however increase/decrease the band height as you
like. There are two ways to do that. The first way is simply to drag the
blue band-line as shown below.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireport/17_drag.jpg)

The other way to adjust the band height is to select a band in the
"Report Inspector", and then adjust the "Band height" value in the
"Detail 1 - properties" area in the lower right corner.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireport/18_adjust.jpg)

As the fields are already present on the report, you probably don't want
to do anything than just fix the layout and drag fields around. You can
also resize the fields by dragging the side, top or bottom lines. If you
want to change the text in the column headers, you simply double click
the field and change the text.

To add the a field to the table, we simply drag it to the Detail 1 band
from the "Report Inspector". The column header will be added
automatically.

By double clicking the box, the text can be edited. The format of the
text, such as size, font and alignment, can be adjusted with the tools
above the document.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireport/21_title_edit.jpg)

> **NOTE**
>
> Fields starting with "$F" present values that are
> retrieved from the database every time the report is run. The values
> here will vary, so do not change these fields unless you want a static
> value here!

#### Text { #text } 

There are two types of text in iReport: «Text labels» and «Text fields»
(data fields). They work in different ways, and should be used for
different purposes. The main point is that text fields are just
placeholders that will be filled with the correct text from the report
table when the report is run, while text labels will stay the way they
are when the report is run.

##### Static text { #static-text } 

Static text are text plain text labels that can be edited normally.
There are two ways to edit text labels:

  - By double clicking in the text box

  - By using the Static text properties in the Properties
panel


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_01.jpg)

##### Text fields { #text-fields } 

Text fields are formulas that will be filled from the report table when
the report is run. Unlike static text, these can not be edited in a
normal way. However, they can be manipulated in various ways to ensure
that the desired output will be produced. There are three ways to edit
the text fields:

  - By right clicking on the text box and selecting Edit expression

  - By double clicking the text field (not recommended, as this will not
    bring up the expression editor)

  - By using the Text field properties in the Properties
panel


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_04.jpg)

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_06.jpg)

Text fields can represent either numbers or text, so that they can be
used both for showing for example names of district or for numeric
values. It is therefore important the Expression class, seen in the Text
field properties matches the Text field expression. For the default text
fields in the .jrxml file downloaded from DHIS2 this is not a problem,
but it is important when making new text fields. The two most important
Expression classes are java.lang.Double for numbers and java.lang.String
for text.

###### Example { #example } 

For example, let us say you have a quarterly report where you would like
to add a new column with the yearly total. You therefore add a new
Static text field to the column header band, and a Text field to the
details band in. By default, new Text fields are set to java.lang.String
(text). However, the yearly total column will be filled with numbers. We
therefore have to change the Expression class for the new text field to
java.lang.Double:

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_07.jpg)

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_08.jpg)

When we edit the text field expression, we see the Expression editor
window with all the available columns from the report table. We can see
here that each of these are marked with what type they are - text or
number. What we need to make sure of is therefore that the expression
class we choose for the text field matches the actual
expression.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_10.jpg)

### Filtering the table rows { #filtering-the-table-rows } 

In the default table exported from DHIS2, there are some rows that it
might be better to leave out of the table, and some that it would be
preferable to have at the end. For example, when making a table based on
a report table with the «parent organisation unit» parameter, the
default table might have a row with the national level somewhere in
between all the regions. In iReport, this can be changed so that the
«parent organisation unit» appears at the bottom of the table. This
involves two steps that will be explained below. Note that this will not
work where there is only one organisation units, and it is therefore
most useful when using the «parent organisation unit» or «grand parent
organisation unit» parameters in the report table.

#### Hiding the «parameter organisation unit» from the table { #hiding-the-parameter-organisation-unit-from-the-table } 

We exclude the "parameter organisation unit" from the table by using a
property in the Details band called "Print when expression". To set a
Print when expression, start by selecting the Detail band in the Report
inspector, then edit the Print when expression in the properties
panel.


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_11.jpg)

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_12.jpg)

The Expression editor window should now appear. What we must do is to
create an expression that checks if the row being generated is the row
with the organisation unit given as a parameter. The report table
contains a column that we can use for this called
organisation\_unit\_is\_parent. To exclude the row with the parameter
organisation unit, double click on organisation\_unit\_is\_parent in the
list to copy it to the expression area, then add `.equals("No")` at the
end so that the code is:

```
$F{organisation_unit_is_parent}.equals("No")
```

This tells the report engine to only print table rows where the
organisation unit is not the parent organisation
unit.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_14.jpg)

#### Putting the "param organisation unit" at the bottom of the table { #putting-the-param-organisation-unit-at-the-bottom-of-the-table } 

Instead of removing the "param organisation unit" from the table
entirely, it is also possible to put it at the bottom (or top) of the
table. This is done by using the sort functionality explained in the
next section, and choosing to sort first by
"organisation\_unit\_is\_parent". Other sorting options can be added in
addition to this, for example to make a list where the param
organisation unit is at the bottom of the table, with the other
organisation units listed alphabetically above it.

#### Hiding other rows { #hiding-other-rows } 

Using the expression editor it is also possible to exclude other rows
from the table, in addition to the parent organisation unit as was
explained above. In Ghana, for example, all regions have a «fake
district» which is the name of the region in square brackets. This can
also be excluded from the table using the Print when expression that was
introduced above. To to this, follow the instructions above to bring up
the Expression editor window. Then, we use Java expressions to test
whether or not the row should be hidden.

##### Example - removing rows with organisation units starting with \[ { #example-removing-rows-with-organisation-units-starting-with } 

Example - removing rows with organisation units starting with \[

```
($F{organisationunitname}.charAt( 0 ) != '[')
```

This makes the report skip any rows where the first character of the
organisation unit name is \[.

It is also possible to combine several of these expressions. To do this
we put the expressions in a parenthesis with the two characters && in
between. For example, to make a table that leaves both organisation
units whose name starts with \[ and the parent organisation unit, we can
use the following expression:

```
($F{organisationunitname}.charAt( 0 ) != '[')&&$F{organisation_unit_is_parent}.equals("No")
```


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_29.jpg)

### Sorting { #sorting } 

Often you will be making reports where the first column is organisation
unit names. However, it can be a problem that the list of organisation
units are not sorted alphabetically. This can be fixed in iReport
through a few simple steps.

In the report inspector, right click on the name of the report (by
default this is dpt) and select Edit
query.


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_21.jpg)

A Report query window will appear. Click on the Sort options
button.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_22.jpg)

A Sorting window as show below will appear. Here, we can add our sorting
options. Click the Add field button. Another small window will show up,
with a drop down menu where you can choose Sort by organisationunitname
to have the table sorted alphabetically by
name.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_23.jpg)

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_24.jpg)

Click OK - Close - OK to close the three windows. The table should now
be sorted.

### Changing indicator/data element names { #changing-indicatordata-element-names } 

By default, the reports from DHIS2 uses the short names for indicators
and data elements in reports and charts. In some cases these are not
always very meaningful for third parties, but with some work they can be
given custom names through iReport. This is useful for example if you
are making a report with indicators as rows and periods as column, or
for charts with
indicators.


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_000.jpg)

To change the names of an indicator or data element, we have to edit its
«expression» or formula, for example by right clicking the text box and
choosing Edit expression to bring up the Expression
editor.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_32.jpg)

Next, we have to insert some Java code. In the following example, we
will be replacing the shortname of three indicators with their proper
names. The code searches for the shortname, and then replaces it with a
proper name.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_34.jpg)

```
($F{indicatorname}.equals("Bed Util All")) ? "Bed Utilisation - All Wards"
:
($F{indicatorname}.equals("Bed Util Mat")) ? "Bed Utilisation - Maternity"
:
($F{indicatorname}.equals("Bed Util Ped")) ? "Bed Utilisation - Paediatric"
:
$F{indicatorname}
```

From this, we can see a pattern that is reusable for more general cases.

  - For each indicator or data element we want to change the name for,
    we need one line

  - Each line is separated by a colon :

  - We finish the expression with a «regular» line

Each line has the same format, where the red text is the shortname, the
blue text is what we want to insert
instead.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/ireport_screen_0.jpg)

The same expressions can be used for example when having indicator names
along the category axis of a chart.

### Adding horizontal totals { #adding-horizontal-totals } 

By using the expression editor, it is possible to add a column to the
table with totals for each row. In the following example, we will make a
table with three months as columns as well as a column with the totals
for the three months.

We start by dragging a text label into the table header and changing its
text to "Total", and dragging a text field into the details row.

As was discussed in the section on "Text field", we have to change the
properties of the new text field so that it can display numbers. To do
this, change the "Expressions Class" in the properties panel to
"java.lang.Double".

Right click the text field and choose "Edit Expression". This will bring
up the "Expressions editor". As the expression, we want to sum up all
the columns. In this case we have three value expressions we want to sum
up: "September", "October 2010", "November 2010". The name of these
fields will vary depending on the crosstab dimension you have chosen in
the report table. In our case, the expression we make is
```
$f{September}+$f{October 2010}+$f{November 2010}
``` 
Each row of the table will have a totals column to the right.

### Groups of tables { #groups-of-tables } 

There are cases when it can be useful to have several tables in one
report. This can be done using Report groups. Using this functionality,
one can for example create a report one table for each indicator, or one
table of each organisation unit. In the following, we will go through
the steps needed to make a report with three indicators, each
represented in one table. It is important that the report table does not
crosstab on indicators when we want to make groups of tables based on
indicators.

In our example, the .jrxml file downloaded from DHIS2 will by default
have one column for organisation unit and on for indicators (assuming we
have chosen periods as the only crosstab dimension). We start by
removing the indicator column, since this in not needed in our case, and
realign the other fields to fit the
report.


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_36.jpg)

Next, we create out Report group. Go to the report inspector, right
click on the report name (dpt is the default) and choose Add Report
Group.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_38.jpg)

A window will appear, with a report group wizard. Select a name for the
group, in this case we choose «Indicator». In the drop down menu, we can
select what columns in the report table we want the groups to be based
on. So, if we wanted one table for each organisation unit, we would
choose organisation unit name as the report object to group according
to. However, since we are grouping by indicators in this example, we
choose indicatorname. Then click
next.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_39.jpg)

The next step is to select whether or not we want a separate Group
header and Group footer band for each report group. In this case, we
choose to include both. Click Finish, and the group bands should appear
in the
report.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_40.jpg)

If you upload and run the report, it will now create one table for each
indicator. However, it will not look very good as there will be no
header row over each table - only one header at the top of each page.
Also, there is no indication as to which table is showing which
indicator. In the following, we will fix this.

Instead of having the title row in the column header, we can instead
move it to the Group header. This will make the heading show up above
each individual table. Furthermore, we can add a heading to each table
with the name of the indicator.

Move the column headers from the Column header band to the Indicator
group header
band.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_41.jpg)

Next, add a text field to the Indicator group heading band, and edit
it’s expression to display the indicator
name.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_42.jpg)

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_44.jpg)

The report should now have three tables, one for each indicator. Each
table will have a heading with the name of the indicator, and also a
table header
row.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_45.jpg)

#### Sorting and grouping { #sorting-and-grouping } 

When using grouping, some precautions must be taken with regards to
sorting. Notably, when adding sorting parameters, whatever parameter is
used as basis for the grouping must come first. Thus if you are grouping
the report by indicator, and want sort the organisation units
alphabetically, you have to choose to sort first by indicator, then by
organisation unit name as shown below. For instructions on how to add
sorting, see the sorting section
above.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_59.jpg)

## Charts { #charts } 

By default, a 3D bar chart is included in the .jrxml file that is
downloaded from DHIS 2. This is set up so that only data from the
«parameter organisation unit» (often the parent or grand parent) is
used. Usually, this is a good solution. Since it is the default, we will
start by looking at bar charts, before looking at line
charts.

### Bar charts { #bar-charts } 


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_54.jpg)

Bar charts are the default chart type in DHIS2. In this section, we will
look at how to make a bar charts like the one above, comparing the value
of one indicator in several districts. To edit the default chart in
iReport, right click on it and choose Chart
data.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_46.jpg)

A window will appear. By default, the Filter expression is filled in so
that only data for the parent organisation unit will be displayed. If
for some reason you do not want this, simply delete the text in the text
box. In this case we do NOT want the filter, as we are making a chart
showing a comparison across districts. To continue, click the details
tab.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_47.jpg)

Under details, you see the list of series for the chart. By default, one
series is created per crosstab column. In this case, we are looking at
data for one indicator for the whole of 2010, for a number of districts.
The indicator is along the crosstab
dimension.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_48.jpg)

To make changes to a series, select it and click modify. Another window
will appear where there are four areas that can be edit. The three first
are required, but it is sufficient to add an empty quote («») in one of
the first
two.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_500.jpg)

The first box is a text field where the name of the series can be
inserted or edited. This is the field that will be used to fill the text
in the legend box (shown
below).

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_50.jpg)

However, if you want to have the name of each bar along the x-axis of
the chart instead of using the legend, this can be done by adding
whatever text you want to present in the Category expression field, or
by inserting an expression to have it filled automatically when the
report is run. In this case, we want to have one bar for each
organisation unit. We therefore edit the category expression by clicking
on the button to the
right.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_49.jpg)

As the expression, we chose organisationunitname, as shown
below.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_490.jpg)

When we are finished, the series editor should look like below. Click
OK, then Close to close the Chart Details
window.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_501.jpg)

If you add a good description in the Category expression area, you can
leave out the legend box. This is done in the Report properties panel of
iReport, where you can also edit many other details of the
chart.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_51.jpg)

We can also add a title to the chart, for example the name of the
indicator. This is also done in the Chart properties panel, under Title
expression.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_55.jpg)

The Expression editor window will appear, where you can enter the title.
Note that the title must be in quotes, as shown
below.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_56.jpg)

The chart is now ready.

### Line charts { #line-charts } 

Line charts can be useful in many circumstances. However, to make line
charts the report data (report table) must be suited for it. Thus if you
want to make a line chart, it is important that the report table does
not have periods in the crosstab dimension. Examples where this is
useful is if you are making a report for a single organisation unit with
one or more indicators, or if you are making a report with one indicator
and one or more organisation units.

Below, we will go though the steps needed to make a report with a line
chart showing the development of three indicators over one year, for one
organisation unit. We start by making a report table with the choices
shown
below:


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_57.jpg)

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_60.jpg)

When we open the resulting .jrxml-file in iReport, the default line
chart is included. Since we want to make a line chart, we delete this
chart and drag a new chart element into the report from the Palette
panel.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_61.jpg)

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_62.jpg)

As soon as we drag the Chart element into the report, a window will
appear. We choose the Line chart, as shown
below.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_63.jpg)

A chart wizard will appear. Click next in the first step, then Finish in
the next - we will add the data
later.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_64.jpg)

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_65.jpg)

Next, adjust the size and position of the chart in your report. Then, we
will add one data series for each of our three indicators. Right-click
on the chart and choose Chart data. If you are making a chart with one
indicator and several organisation units, you probably want to make a
filter expression so that only data from the parameter/parent
organisation unit is used in the chart. To do this, add this line to the
Filter expression area:

`$F{organisation_unit_is_parent}.equals("Yes")`

In our example, we only have on organisation unit, so this is not
necessary. Next, click the details tab to see a list of the series in
the chart. For now, this list is empty, but we will add one series for
each of our three indicators. To add a series, click the Add
button.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_66.jpg)

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_67.jpg)

In the window that appears, enter the name of the first of the
indicators in the Series expression window. Remember to put the name in
quotes. In the category expression (along the x-axis) we want the
months, so we use the button next to the field to open the Expression
editor and add
periodname.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_69.jpg)

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_68.jpg)

In the value expression, we add the actual data values for our first
indicator. Use the Expression editor again to do this. When we are
finished, the window should look like the one below, only with different
names according to the
indicator.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_70.jpg)

You can then Click OK to close the window. Follow the same steps to add
a series for the other
indicators.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_71.jpg)

Close the window, and the data for the line chart should be ready.
However, some additional adjustments might be needed - most of these can
be found in the Line chart properties panel. For example, when making a
month by month chart as we have in example, there is often not enough
space for the month names along the category axis. This can be fixed by
rotating the labels by for example -40 degrees, by using the property
Category Axis Tick Label
Rotation.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_72.jpg)

Many other options are available to give the chart the desired
look.

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireportadv/irep_screen_73.jpg)

## Adding the Report to DHIS2 { #adding-the-report-to-dhis2 } 

We can now switch to DHIS2 and import our report. Go to the Report
Module in DHIS2, and select "Standard Report". In the "Standard Report"
screen, click "Add new", or edit an existing one.

In the following screen, there are several actions we need to take.
First, enter a name for the new "Standard Report". Second, for design,
click "Choose File" and find the .jrxml-file you have edited in iReport.
Then we select the report table that we used as a basis for the report
in iReport. Click add, and it should move to the "Selected report
tables" area. Finally, click
save.


![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireport/27_new_std_report.jpg)

The report is now available as a "Standard Report" in DHIS2:

![](resources/images/dhis2_creating_reporting/ireport/28_done.jpg)

## Some final guidelines { #some-final-guidelines } 

  - Use the same version of iReport and DHIS2's version of Jasper
    reports. See the About page in DHIS2 for the Jasper version in use.

  - Use report tables with cross tab dimensions as your data source for
    your report designs. This will make it a lot easier to design
    reports where you need to put specific indicators, periods, or
    orgunits on columns.

  - Learn from others, there are many DHIS2 report designs for Jasper on
    launchpad, see
    http://bazaar.launchpad.net/~DHIS2-devs-core/DHIS2/trunk/files/head:/resources/



## Designing SQL based standard reports { #designing-sql-based-standard-reports } 

A standard report might be based on SQL queries. This is useful when you
need to access multiple tables in the DHIS2 database and do custom
selects and joins.

\- This step is optional, but handy when you need to debug your reports
and when you have direct access to the database you want to use. Click
on the "report datasources" button, "New", "Database JDBC connection"
and click "next". In this window you can give you connection a name and
select the JDBC driver. PostgreSQL and MySQL should come included in
your iReport. Then enter the JDBC connection URL, username and password.
The last three refers to your database and can be retrieved from your
DHIS2 configuration file (hibernate.properties). Click "save". You have
now connected iReport to your database.

\- Go to standard reports and click "add new", then "get report
template". Open this template in iReport. This template contains a
series of report parameters which can be used to create dynamic SQL
statements. These parameters will be substituted based on the report
parameters which we will later select and include in the standard
report. The parameters are:

  - periods - string of comma-separated identifiers of the relative
    periods

  - period\_name - name of the reporting period

  - organisationunits - identifier of the selected organisation units

  - organisationunit\_name - name of the reporting organisation unit

  - organisationunit\_level - level of the reporting organisation unit

  - organisationunit\_level\_column - name of the corresponding column
    in the \_orgunitstructure resource table

These parameters can be included in SQL statements using the
`$P\!{periods}` syntax, where "periods" represents the parameter.

\- To create a SQL query in iReport, click on the "report query" button.
Write or paste your query into the textarea. An example SQL query using
parameters which will create a report displaying raw data values at the
fourth level in the org unit hierarchy is:
```
    select district.name as district, chiefdom.name as chiefdom, ou.name as facility,
    bcg.value as bcg, yellowfever.value as yellowfever, measles.value as  measles
    from organisationunit ou
    left outer join _orgunitstructure ous
      on (ou.organisationunitid=ous.organisationunitid)
    left outer join organisationunit district
      on (ous.idlevel2=district.organisationunitid)
    left outer join organisationunit chiefdom
      on (ous.idlevel3=chiefdom.organisationunitid)
    left outer join (
      select sourceid, sum(cast(value as double precision)) as value
      from datavalue
      where dataelementid=359706
      and periodid=$P!{periods}
      group by sourceid) as bcg on bcg.sourceid=ou.organisationunitid
    left outer join (
      select sourceid, sum(cast(value as double precision)) as value
      from datavalue
      where dataelementid=35
      and periodid=$P!{periods}
      group by sourceid) as yellowfever on yellowfever.sourceid=ou.organisationunitid
    where ous.level=4
    and ous.$P!{organisationunit_level_column}=$P!{organisationunits}
    order by district.name, chiefdom.name, ou.name;
```
Notice how all parameters are used in the query, along with SQL joins of
resource tables in the DHIS2 database.

\- Finally, back in the add new report screen, we click on "Use JDBC
data source". This enables you to select any relative period and report
parameters for your report. Relative periods are relative to today's
date. Report parameters will cause a prompt during report creation and
makes it possible to dynamically select organisation units and periods
to use for your report during runtime. For the example above, we must
select "reporting month" under relative periods and both "reporting
month" and "organisation unit" under report parameters. Click save. This
will redirect you to the list of reports, where you can click the green
"create" icon next to your report to render it.

## Designing HTML based standard reports { #designing-html-based-standard-reports } 

A standard report can be designed using purely HTML and JavaScript. This
requires a little bit of development experience in the mentioned
subjects. The benefit of HTML based standard reports is that it allows
for maximum flexibility. Using HTML you can design exactly the report
you want, positioning tables, logos and values on the page according to
your design needs. You can write and save your standard report design in
a regular text file. To upload your HTML based standard report to DHIS2
do the following:

  - Navigate to standard reports and click "Add new".

  - Give the report a name.

  - Select "HTML report" as type.

  - If you want to you can download a report template by clicking on
    "Get HTML report template".

  - Select desired relative periods - these will be available in
    JavaScript in your report.

  - Select report parameters - these will be available in JavaScript in
    your report.

The report template, which you can download after selecting report type,
is a useful starting point for developing HTML based standard reports.
It gives you the basic structure and suggests how you can use JavaScript
and CSS in the report. JavaScript and CSS can easily be included using
standard script and style tags.

If you selected relative periods when creating the standard report you
can access these in JavaScript like this:

    var periods = dhis2.report.periods; // An array with period identifiers
    var period = periods[0];

If you selected the organisation unit report parameter when creating the
standard report you can access the selected organisation unit in
JavaScript like this:

    var orgUnit = dhis2.report.organisationUnit; // An object
    var id = orgUnit.id; 
    var name = orgUnit.name;
    var code = orgUnit.code;

When designing these reports you can utilize the analytics Web API
resource in order to retrieve aggregated data in JavaScript. Have a look
in the Web API chapter in this guide for a closer description. As a
complete, minimal example you can retrieve analytics data after the
report has been loaded and use that data to set the inner text of an
HTML element like this:

    <script type="text/javascript">
    $( document ).ready( function() {
        $.get( "../api/analytics?dimension=dx:FnYCr2EAzWS;eTDtyyaSA7f&dimension=pe:THIS_YEAR&filter=ou:ImspTQPwCqd", function( json ) {
            $( "#bcg" ).html( json.rows[0][2] );
            $( "#fic" ).html( json.rows[1][2] );
        } );
    } );
    </script>

    <div>BGG coverage: <span id="bcg"></span></div>
    <div>FIC coverage: <span id="fic"></span></div>

A few other tips: To include graphics you can convert an image to SVG
and embed that SVG content directly in the report - DHIS2 is based on
HTML 5 where SVG tags are valid markup. To include charts and maps in
your report you can use the charts and maps resources in the Web API.
You can use the full capability of the Web API from JavaScript in your
report - it may be useful to read through the Web API chapter to get an
overview of all available resources.


# System settings { #settings } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:settings-->

## General settings { #system_general_settings } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:system_general_settings-->

<table>
<caption>General settings</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Setting</p></th>
<th><p>Description</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Maximum number of analytics records</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Increase this number to provide more records from the analytics.</p>
<p>The default value is 50,000.</p>
<blockquote>
<p><strong>Warning</strong></p>
<p>Use the setting <strong>Unlimited</strong> carefully, it might result in a very high load on your server.</p>
</blockquote></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Maximum number of SQL view records</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Set the maximum number of records in a SQL view.</p>
<p>The default value is Unlimited.</p>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Infrastructural indicators</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Defines an indicator group where the member indicators should describe data about the organisation units' infrastructure.</p>
<p>You can view the infrastructural data in the <strong>GIS</strong> app: right-click a facility and click <strong>Show information</strong>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Infrastructural data elements</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Defines a data element group where the member data elements should describe data about the organisation units' infrastructure.</p>
<p>Infrastructural data elements can be population, doctors, beds, Internet connectivity and climate.</p>
<p>You can view the infrastructural data in the <strong>GIS</strong> app: right-click a facility and click <strong>Show information</strong>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Infrastructural period type</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Sets the frequency for which the data elements in the infrastructural data elements group are captured.</p>
<p>This will typically be yearly. When viewing the infrastructural data you will be able to select the time period of the data source.</p>
<p>You can view the infrastructural data in the <strong>GIS</strong> app: right-click a facility and click <strong>Show information</strong>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Default relative period for analysis</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Setting this value will determine which relative period is selected as the default in the analytics apps.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Feedback recipients</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Defines a user group where the members will receive all messages sent via the feedback function in the <strong>Dashboard</strong> app.</p>
<p>This will typically be members of the super user team who are able to support and answer questions coming from end-users.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Max offline organisation unit levels</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Defines how many levels in the organisation unit hierarchy will be available offline in the organisation unit tree widget.</p>
<p>Under normal circumstances you can leave this on the lowest level, which is default is the default setting.</p>
<p>It can be useful to set it to a higher level to reduce initial load time in cases where you have a large number of organisation units, typically more than 30 000.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Data analysis std dev factor</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Sets the number of standard deviations used in the outlier analysis performed on the captured data in the <strong>Data Entry</strong> app.</p>
<p>The default value is 2. A high value will catch less outlier values than a low value.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Phone number area code</strong></p></td>
<td><p>The area code for the area in which your deployment is located.</p>
<p>Used for sending and receiving SMS. Typically, this is a country code.</p>
<p><em>+260</em> (country code for Zambia)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Enable multi-organisation unit forms</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Enables support to enter data forms for multiple organisation units at the same time in the <strong>Data Entry</strong> app.</p>
<p>If you've enabled this setting, you can in the <strong>Data Entry</strong> app, click on the parent organisation unit for the children that you want to enter data for, and the data set list will include data sets that are assigned to the children of that parent.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>Acceptance required before approval</strong></td>
<td>When this setting is selected, acceptance of data will be required first before submission to the next approval level is possible.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## Analytics settings { #system_analytics_settings } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:system_analytics_settings-->

<table>
<caption>Analytics settings</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Setting</p></th>
<th><p>Description</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Default relative period for analysis</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Defines the relative period to use by default in analytics app: <strong>Data Visualizer</strong>, <strong>Event Reports</strong>, <strong>Event Visualizer</strong>, <strong>GIS</strong> and <strong>Pivot Table</strong> apps. The relative period will be automatically selected when you open these apps.</p>
<p>Recommended setting: the most commonly used relative period among your users.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
    <td><p><strong>Hide daily periods</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Hide daily periods in the analysis tools</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
    <td><p><strong>Hide weekly periods</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Hide weekly periods in the analysis tools</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
    <td><p><strong>Hide monthly periods</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Hide monthly periods in the analysis tools</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
    <td><p><strong>Hide bimonthly periods</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>Hide bimonthly periods in the analysis tools</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>Financial year relative start month</strong></td>
<td>Defines which month (April, July or October) the the relative financial year in the analytics apps should begin on.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Cacheability</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Sets whether analytics data responses should be served with public or private visibility.</p>
<p><strong>Private</strong>: Any node or server between the DHIS2 server and the end user which has the ability to cache can NOT cache the web page. This is useful if the page served can or do contain sensitive information. This means that each time you want a web page, either you get a new page from the DHIS2 server, or the DHIS2 server caches the page. No other server than the DHIS2 server are allowed to cache the page.</p>
<p><strong>Public</strong>: Any node or server between the DHIS2 server and the end user which has the ability to cache can cache the web page. This relives the traffic to the DHIS2 server and potentially speeds up the subsequent page loading speed.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Cache strategy</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Decides for how long reports analytics responses should be cached.</p>
<p>If you use the scheduled, nightly analytics update, select <strong>Cache until 6 AM tomorrow</strong>. This is because data in reports change at that time, and you can safely cache data up to the moment when the analytics tables are updated.</p>
<p>If you are loading data continuously into the analytics tables, select <strong>No cache</strong>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Max number of years to hide unapproved data in analytics</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Sets whether and for how long back in time analytics should respect the approval level of the data. Typically, data which is several years old would be considered to be approved by default. In order to speed up analytics requests, you can choose to ignore the actual approval level of historical data.</p>
<p><strong>Never check approval</strong>: no data will be hidden, irrespective of its data approval status.</p>
<p><strong>Check approval for all data</strong>: approval status will always be checked.</p>
<p>Other options, for example <strong>Last 3 years</strong>: approval status will be checked for data which is newer than 3 years old; older data will not be checked.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Threshold for analytics data caching</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Sets whether to enable caching data older than the specified number of years only.</p>
<p>This allows for returning the most recent data directly with no caching, while serving cached version of older data for performance concerns.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Respect category option start and end date in analytics table export</strong></p></td>
<td><p>This setting controls whether analytics should filter data which is associated with a category option with a start and end date, but which is not associated with a period within the category options interval of validity.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Put analytics in maintenance mode</strong></p></td>
<td>Places the analytics and web API of DHIS2 in maintenance mode. This means that &quot;503 Service Unavailable&quot; will be returned for all requests.
<p>This is useful when you need to perform maintenance on the server, for example rebuilding indexes while the server is running in production, in order to reduce load and more efficiently carry out the maintenance.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Skip zero data values in analytics tables</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Does not include in analytics tables any aggregate data values that are zero. This can reduce analytics tables sizes, and speed up the building and accessing of the analytics tables, if you have aggregate data values that are zero and stored (the data element is configured to store zero values).</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## Server settings { #system_server_settings } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:system_server_settings-->

<table>
<caption>Server settings</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Setting</p></th>
<th><p>Description</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Number of database server CPUs</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Sets the number of CPU cores of your database server.</p>
<p>This allows the system to perform optimally when the database is hosted on a different server than the application server, since analytics in DHIS2 scales linearly with the number of available cores.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>System notifications email address</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Defines the email address which will receive system notifications.</p>
<p>Notifications about failures in processes such as analytics table generation will be sent here. This is useful for application monitoring.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Google Analytics (Universal Analytics) key</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Sets the Google UA key to provide usage analytics for your DHIS2 instance through the Google Analytics platform. It should be noted that currently, not all apps in DHIS2 support Google Analytics, so certain activity of your users may not appear in this platform.</p>
<p>You can read more about Google Analytics at <a href="http://google.com/analytics" class="uri">http://google.com/analytics</a>.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## Appearance settings { #system_appearance_settings } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:system_appearance_settings-->

<table>
<caption>Appearance settings</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Setting</p></th>
<th><p>Description</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Select language</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Sets the language for which you can then enter translations of the following settings:</p>
<ul>
<li><p><strong>Application introduction</strong></p></li>
<li><p><strong>Application title</strong></p></li>
<li><p><strong>Application notification</strong></p></li>
<li><p><strong>Application left-side footer</strong></p></li>
<li><p><strong>Application right-side footer</strong></p></li>
</ul></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Application title</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Sets the application title on the top menu.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Application introduction</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Sets an introduction of the system which will be visible on the top-left part of the login page.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Application notification</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Sets a notification which will be visible on the front page under the login area.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Application left-side footer</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Sets a text in the left-side footer area of the login page.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Application right-side footer</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Sets a text in the right-side footer area of the login page.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Style</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Sets the style (look-and-feel) of the system.</p>
<p>The user can override this setting in the <strong>Settings</strong> app: <strong>User settings</strong> &gt; <strong>Style</strong>.</p>
<blockquote>
<p><strong>Note</strong></p>
<p>Due to technical reasons, it's not possible to change the color of the newest version of the header bar. The apps with the newest header bar will retain the blue header bar.</p>
</blockquote></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Start page</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Sets the page or app which the user will be redirected to after log in.</p>
<p>Recommended setting: the <strong>Dashboard</strong> app.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Help page link</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Defines the URL which users will see when they click <strong>Profile</strong> &gt;<strong>Help</strong>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Flag</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Sets the flag which is displayed in the left menu of the <strong>Dashboard</strong> app.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Interface language</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Sets the language used in the user interface.</p>
<p>The user can override this setting in the <strong>Settings</strong> app: <strong>User settings</strong> &gt; <strong>Interface language</strong>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Database language</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Sets the language used in the database.</p>
<p>The user can override this setting in the <strong>Settings</strong> app: <strong>User settings</strong> &gt; <strong>Database language</strong>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Property to display in analysis modules</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Sets whether you want to display the metadata objects' names or short names in the analytics apps: <strong>Data Visualizer</strong>, <strong>Event Reports</strong>, <strong>Event Visualizer</strong>, <strong>GIS</strong> and <strong>Pivot Table</strong> apps.</p>
<p>The user can override this setting in the <strong>Settings</strong> app: <strong>User settings</strong> &gt; <strong>Property to display in analysis modules</strong>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Default digit group separator to display in analysis modules</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Sets the default digit group separator in the analytics apps: <strong>Data Visualizer</strong>, <strong>Event Reports</strong>, <strong>Event Visualizer</strong>, <strong>GIS</strong> and <strong>Pivot Table</strong> apps.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Require authority to add to view object lists</strong></p></td>
<td><p>If you select this option, you'll hide menu and index page items and links to lists of objects if the current user doesn't have the authority to create the type of objects (privately or publicly).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Custom login page logo</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Select this option and upload an image to add your logo to the login page.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Custom top menu logo</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Select this option and upload an image to add your logo to the left in the top menu.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## Email settings { #system_email_settings } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:system_email_settings-->

<table>
<caption>Email settings</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Setting</p></th>
<th><p>Description</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Host name</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Sets the host name of the SMTP server.</p>
<p>When you use Google SMTP services, the host name should be <em>smtp.gmail.com</em>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Port</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Sets the port to connect to the SMTP server.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>User name</strong></p></td>
<td><p>The user name of the user account with the SMTP server.</p>
<p>mail@dhis2.org</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Password</strong></p></td>
<td><p>The password of the user account with the SMTP server.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>TLS</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Select this option if the SMPT server requires TLS for connections.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Email sender</strong></p></td>
<td><p>The email address to use as sender when sending out emails.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Send me a test email</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Sends a test email to the current user logged into DHIS2.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## Messaging settings { #system_messaging_settings } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:system_messaging_settings-->

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Setting</p></th>
<th><p>Description</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Enable message email notifications</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Defines whether DHIS2 user messages should be delivered to the email address associated with the user by default. This setting can be overridden by user settings.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Enable message SMS notifications</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Defines whether DHIS2 user messages should be delivered as SMS to the mobile phone number associated with the user by default. This setting can be overridden by user settings.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## Access settings { #system_access_settings } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:system_access_settings-->

<table>
<caption>Access settings</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Setting</p></th>
<th><p>Description</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Self registration account user role</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Defines which user role should be given to self-registered user accounts.</p>
<p>To enable self-registration of users: select any user role from the list. A link to the self-registration form will be displayed on the login page.</p>
<blockquote>
<p><strong>Note</strong></p>
<p>To enable self-registration, you must also select a <strong>Self registration account organisation unit</strong>.</p>
</blockquote>
<p>To disable self-registration of users: select <strong>Disable self registration</strong>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Self registration account organisation unit</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Defines which organisation unit should be associated with self-registered users.</p>
<blockquote>
<p><strong>Note</strong></p>
<p>To enable self-registration, you must also select a <strong>Self registration account user role</strong>.</p>
</blockquote></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Do not require reCAPTCHA for self registration</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Defines whether you want to use reCAPTCHA for user self-registration. This is enabled by default.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Enable user account recovery</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Defines whether users can restore their own passwords.</p>
<p>When this setting is enabled, a link to the account recovery form will be displayed on the front page.</p>
<blockquote>
<p><strong>Note</strong></p>
<p>User account recovery requires that you have configured email settings (SMTP).</p>
</blockquote></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Lock user account temporarily after multiple failed login attempts</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Defines whether the system should lock user accounts after five successive failed login attempts over a timespan of 15 minutes.</p>
<p>The account will be locked for 15 minutes, then the user can attempt to log in again.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Allow users to grant own user roles</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Defines whether users can grant user roles which they have themselves to others when creating new users.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Allow assigning object to related objects during add or update</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Defines whether users should be allowed to assign an object to a related object when they create or edit metadata objects.</p>
<p>You can allow users to assign an organisation unit to data sets and organisation unit group sets when creating or editing the organisation unit.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Require user account password change</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Defines whether users should be forced to change their passwords every 3, 6 or 12 months.</p>
<p>If you don't want to force users to change password, select <strong>Never</strong>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>Enable password expiry alerts</strong></td>
<td>When set, users will receive a notification when their password is about to expire.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Minimum characters in password</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Defines the minimum number of characters users must have in their passwords.</p>
<p>You can select 8 (default), 10, 12 or 14.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>OpenID provider</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Defines the OpenID provider.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>OpenID provider label</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Defines the label to display for the specified OpenID provider.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>CORS whitelist</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Whitelists a set of URLs which can access the DHIS2 API from another domain. Each URL should be entered on separate lines. Cross-origin resource sharing (CORS) is a mechanism that allows restricted resources (e.g. javascript files) on a web page to be requested from another domain outside the domain from which the first resource was served.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Google Maps API key</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Defines the API key for the Google Maps API. This is used to display maps within DHIS2.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## Calendar settings { #system_calendar_settings } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:system_calendar_settings-->

<table>
<caption>Calendar settings</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Setting</p></th>
<th><p>Description</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Calendar</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Defines which calendar the system will use.</p>
<p>The system supports the following calendars: Coptic, Ethiopian, Gregorian, Islamic (Lunar Hijri), ISO 8601, Julian, Nepali, Persian (Solar Hijri) and Thai.</p>
<blockquote>
<p><strong>Note</strong></p>
<p>This is a s system wide setting. It is not possible to have multiple calendars within a single DHIS2 instance.</p>
</blockquote></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Date format</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Defines which date format the system will use.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## Data import settings { #system_data_import_settings } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:system_data_import_settings-->

The data import settings apply to extra controls which can be enabled to
validate aggregate data which is imported through the web API. They
provide optional constraints on what should be considered a conflict
during import. The constraints are applied to each individual data value
in the import.

<table>
<caption>Data import settings</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Setting</p></th>
<th><p>Description</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Require periods to match period type of data set</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Require period of data value to be of the same period type as the data sets for which the data element of data value is assigned to.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Require category option combos to match category combo of data element</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Require category option combination of data value to be part of the category combination of the data element of the data value.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Require organisation units to match assignment of data set</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Require organisation unit of data value to be assigned to one or more of the data sets which the data element of data value is assigned to.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Require attribute option combos to match category combo of data set</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Require attribute option combination of data value to be part of the category combination of the data set which the data element of data value is assigned to.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Require category option combo to be specified</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Require category option combination of data value to be specified.</p>
<p>By default it will fall back to default category option combination if not specified.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Require attribute option combo to be specified</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Require attribute option combination of data value to be specified.</p>
<p>By default it will fall back to default attribute option combination if not specified.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## Synchronization settings { #synchronization-settings } 

The following settings are used for both data and metadata
synchronization.

> **Note**
>
> For more information about how you configure metadata synchronization,
> refer to [Configure metadata
> synchronizing](https://docs.dhis2.org/master/en/user/html/metadata_sync.html)

<table>
<caption>Synchronization settings</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Setting</p></th>
<th><p>Description</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Remote server URL</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Defines the URL of the remote server running DHIS2 to upload data values to.</p>
<p>It is recommended to use of SSL/HTTPS since user name and password are sent with the request (using basic authentication).</p>
<p>The system will attempt to synchronize data once every minute.</p>
<p>The system will use this setting for metadata synchronization too.</p>
<blockquote>
<p><strong>Note</strong></p>
<p>To enable data and metadata synchronization, you must also enable <strong>Data synchronization</strong> and <strong>Metadata synchronization</strong> in the <strong>Data administration</strong> app &gt; <strong>Scheduling</strong>.</p>
</blockquote></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Remote server user name</strong></p></td>
<td><p>The user name of the DHIS2 user account on the remote server to use for data synchronization.</p>
<blockquote>
<p><strong>Note</strong></p>
<p>If you've enabled metadata versioning, you must make sure that the configured user has the authority &quot;F_METADATA_MANAGE&quot;.</p>
</blockquote></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Remote server password</strong></p></td>
<td><p>The password of the DHIS2 user account on the remote server. The password will be stored encrypted.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Enable versioning for metadata sync</strong></p></td>
<td><p>Defines whether to create versions of metadata when you synchronize metadata between central and local instances.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Don't sync metadata if DHIS versions differ</strong></p></td>
<td><p>The metadata schema changes between versions of DHIS2 which could make different metadata versions incompatible.</p>
<p>When enabled, this option will not allow metadata synchronization to occur if the central and local instance(s) have different DHIS2 versions. This apply to metadata synchronization done both via the user interface and the API.</p>
<p>The only time it might be valuable to disable this option is when synchronizing basic entities, for example data elements, that have not changed across DHIS2 versions.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><strong>Best effort</strong></p></td>
<td><p>A type of metadata version which decides how the importer on local instance(s) will handle the metadata version.</p>
<p><em>Best effort</em> means that if the metadata import encounters missing references (for example missing data elements on a data element group import) it ignores the errors and continues the import.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Atomic</strong></p></td>
<td><p>A type of metadata version which decides how the importer on local instance(s) will handle the metadata version.</p>
<p><em>Atomic</em> means all or nothing - the metadata import will fail if any of the references do not exist.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## OAuth2 clients { #system_oauth2_settings } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:system_oauth2_settings-->

You create, edit and delete OAuth2 clients in the **System Settings**
app.

1.  Open the **System Settings** apps and click **OAuth2 clients**.

2.  Click en el botón agregar.

3.  Enter **Name**, **Client ID** and **Client secret**.

4.  Select **Grant types**.

    <table>
    <colgroup>
    <col style="width: 50%" />
    <col style="width: 50%" />
    </colgroup>
    <thead>
    <tr class="header">
    <th><p>Grant type</p></th>
    <th><p>Description</p></th>
    </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p><strong>Password</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>TBA</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="even">
    <td><p><strong>Refresh token</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>TBA</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="odd">
    <td><p><strong>Authorization code</strong></p></td>
    <td><p>TBA</p></td>
    </tr>
    </tbody>
    </table>

5.  Enter **Redirect URIs**. If you've multiple URIs, separate them with
    a line.


# Data Administration { #data_admin } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:data_admin-->

The data administration module provides a range of functions to ensure
that the data stored in the DHIS2 database is integral and that the
database performance is optimised. These functions should be executed on
a regular basis by a data administrator to ensure that the quality of
the data stored is optimal.

## Data integrity { #dataAdmin_dataIntegrity } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:dataAdmin_dataIntegrity-->

DHIS2 can perform a wide range of data integrity checks on the data
contained in the database. Identifying and correcting data integrity
issues is extremely important for ensuring that the data used for
analysis purposes is valid. Each of the data integrity checks that are
performed by the system will be described, along with general procedures
that can be performed to resolve these issues.

### Data elements without data set { #data-elements-without-data-set } 

Each data element must be assigned to a data set. Values for data
elements will not be able to be entered into the system if a data
element is not assigned to a data set. Choose
Maintenance-\>Datasets-\>Edit from the main menu and then add the
"orphaned" data element to the appropriate data set.

### Data elements without groups { #data-elements-without-groups } 

Some Data Elements have been allocated to several Data Element Groups.
This is currently not allowed, because it will result in duplication of
linked data records in the analytics record sets that provide aggregated
data. Go to Maintenance -\> Data Element Groups to review each Data
Element identified and remove the incorrect Group allocations.

### Data elements violating exclusive group sets { #data-elements-violating-exclusive-group-sets } 

Some data elements have been allocated to several data element groups
that are members of the same data element group set. All group sets in
DHIS2 are defined as exclusive, which means that a data element can
*only* be allocated to *one* data element group within that group set.
Go to Maintenance -\> Data elements and indicators -\>Data element
groups to review each data element identified in the integrity check.
Either remove the data element from all groups except the one that it
should be allocated to, or see if one of the groups should be placed in
a different group set.

### Data elements in data set but not in form or sections { #data-elements-in-data-set-but-not-in-form-or-sections } 

Data elements have been assigned to a data set, but have not been
assigned to any sections of the data set forms. All data sets which use
section forms, should generally have all data elements in the data set
assigned to exactly one section of the dataset.

### Data elements assigned to data sets with different period types { #data-elements-assigned-to-data-sets-with-different-period-types } 

Data elements should not be assigned to two separate data sets whose
period types differ. The recommended approach would be to create two
separate data elements (for instance a monthly and yearly data element)
and assign these to respective datasets.

### Data sets not assigned to organisation units { #data-sets-not-assigned-to-organisation-units } 

All data sets should be assigned to at least one organisation unit.

### Sections with invalid category combinations { #sections-with-invalid-category-combinations } 

Data sets which use section forms should only have a single category
combination within each section. This violation could result from
assigning a data element to a section, but then changing the category
combination of this data element at a later point in time.

### Indicators with identical formulas { #indicators-with-identical-formulas } 

Although this rule will not affect data quality, it generally does not
make sense to have two indicators with the exact same definition. Review
the identified indicators and their formulas and delete or modify any
indicator that appears to be the duplicate.

### Indicators without groups { #indicators-without-groups } 

All data elements and indicators must be assigned to at least one group,
so these Indicators need to be allocated to their correct Data Element
and Indicator Group. From the main menu, go to Data elements/Indicators
-\> Indicator Groups, and allocate each of the \`Orphaned\` indicators
to its correct group.

### Invalid indicator numerators { #invalid-indicator-numerators } 

Violations of this rule may be caused by an incorrect reference to a
deleted or modified data element. Review the indicator and make
corrections to the numerator definition.

### Invalid indicator denominators { #invalid-indicator-denominators } 

Violations of this rule may be caused by an incorrect reference to a
deleted or modified data element. Review the indicator and make
corrections to the denominator definition.

### Indicators violating exclusive group sets { #indicators-violating-exclusive-group-sets } 

Some indicators have been allocated to several indicator groups that are
members of the same indicator group set. All group sets in DHIS2 are
defined as exclusive, which means that an indicator can *only* be
allocated to *one* indicator group within that group set. Go to
Maintenance -\> Data elements and indicators -\>Indicator groups to
review each indicator identified in the integrity check. Either remove
the indicator from all groups except the one that it should be allocated
to, or see if one of the groups should be placed in a different group
set.

### Duplicate periods { #duplicate-periods } 

If periods have been imported from external applications, it may be
possible that some periods will be duplicated. If you have any periods
which appear to be duplicated here, you will need to resolve these
directly in the DHIS2 database. All data which has been assigned to the
duplicated period, should be moved to the correct period, and the
duplicate period should be removed.

### Organisation units with cyclic references { #organisation-units-with-cyclic-references } 

Organisation units cannot be both parent and children of each other,
directly nor indirectly. If this situation occurs, you will need to
resolve the cyclic reference directly in the DHIS2 database in the
"organisation unit" table, by reassigning the "parentid" field of the
organisation units.

### Orphaned organisation units { #orphaned-organisation-units } 

All organisation units must exist within the organisation unit
hierarchy. Go to Organisation- units \>Hierarchy Operations and move the
offending organisation unit into the proper position in the hierarchy.

### Organisation units without groups { #organisation-units-without-groups } 

All organisation units *must* be allocated to at least *one* group. The
problem might either be that you have not defined any compulsory OrgUnit
Group Set at all, or that there are violations of the compulsory rule
for some OrgUnits . NOTE: If you have defined no compulsory OrgUnit
Group Sets, then you must first define them by going to Organisation
units-\>Organisation unit group sets and define at least one compulsory
Group Set (the group set 'Type' are nearly universally relevant). If you
have the relevant group sets, go to Maintenance -\> OrgUnit Groups to
review each OrgUnit identified and add the relevant Group allocation.

### Organisation units violating compulsory group sets { #organisation-units-violating-compulsory-group-sets } 

These organisation units have not been assigned to the any organisation
unit group within one of the *compulsory* organisation unit group sets.
When a group set is defined as compulsory, it means that an organisation
unit must be allocated to at least one organisation unit group within
that group set. For instance, all organisation units must belong to one
of the groups in the 'Type' group set. It might belong to the
\`Hospital\` or the \`Clinic\` or any other 'type' group - but it must
belong to exactly one of them. Go to Organisation units-\>Organisation
unit groups to review each organisation unit identified in the integrity
check. Allocate all organisation units to exactly one compulsory group.

### Organisation units violating exclusive group sets { #organisation-units-violating-exclusive-group-sets } 

Some organisation units have been allocated to several organisation unit
groups that are members of the same organisation unit group set. All
group sets in DHIS2 are defined as exclusive, which means that an
organisation unit can *only* be allocated to *one* organisation unit
group within that Group Set. For instance, one organisation unit cannot
normally belong to the both the 'Hospital' and 'Clinic' groups , but
rather to only to one of them. Go to Organisation unit-\>Organisation
unit groups to review each organisation unit identified in the integrity
check. Remove the organisation units from all groups except the one that
it should be allocated to.

### Organisation unit groups without group sets { #organisation-unit-groups-without-group-sets } 

The organisation unit groups listed here have not been allocated to a
group set. Go to Maintenance-\>Organisation unit-\>Organisation unit
group sets and allocate the Organisation unit group to the appropriate
group set.

### Validation rules without groups { #validation-rules-without-groups } 

All validation rules must be assigned to a group. Go to **Maintenance**
app \> **Validation rule group** and assign the offending validation
rule to a group.

### Invalid validation rule left side expressions { #invalid-validation-rule-left-side-expressions } 

An error exists in the left-side validation rule definition. Go to
**Maintenance** app \> **Validation rule** and click **Edit** on the
offending rule. Click **Left side** and make the required corrections.

### Invalid validation rule right side expressions { #invalid-validation-rule-right-side-expressions } 

An error exists in the right-side validation rule definition. Go to
**Maintenance** app \> **Validation rule** and click **Edit** on the
offending rule. Click **Right side** and make the required corrections.

### ProgramRules with no condition { #programrules-with-no-condition } 

Report will highlight all the **Program rules** not configured with **Condition**. Evaluation for rules not having condition are always evaluated as false.

### ProgramRules with no priority { #programrules-with-no-priority } 

Report will highlight all the **Program rules** not configured with **Priority**. This is optional but its existence is very important when **ProgramRuleActionType** is **ASSIGN**. Rules with ASSIGN action type should have higher priority then the rest of the action types.

### ProgramRules with no action { #programrules-with-no-action } 

Report will highlight all the **Program rules** not configured with any **ProgramRuleAction**.

### ProgramRuleVariables without dataElements { #programrulevariables-without-dataelements } 

Report will highlight all the **Program rule variables** not configured with **DataElement**. Report will be based on source type configuration. DataElement should be provided when the source type of ProgramRuleVariable is **DataElement**.

### ProgramRuleVariables without attributes { #programrulevariables-without-attributes } 

Report will highlight all the **Program rule variables** not configured with **TrackedEntityAttribute**. Report will be based on source type configuration. TrackedEntityAttribute should be provided when the source type of ProgramRuleVariable is **Attribute**.

### ProgramRuleActions with no data Objects. { #programruleactions-with-no-data-objects } 

Report will highlight all the **Program rule actions** not configured with any Data object. Data object can be either **DataElement** of **TrackedEntityAttribute**. There are certain ProgramRuleActions which are responsible for assinging values to either dataElement or trackedEntityAttribute.

### ProgramRuleActions with no notification { #programruleactions-with-no-notification } 

Report will highlight all the **Program rule actions** which have ProgramRuleActionType set to SENDMESSAGE/SCHEDULEMESSAGE where the configuration does not provide any link to notification.

### ProgramRuleActions with no section id { #programruleactions-with-no-section-id } 

Report will highlight all the **Program rule actions** which have ProgramRuleActionType set to **HIDESECTION** but configuration does not provide any section id.

### ProgramRuleActions with no program stage id { #programruleactions-with-no-program-stage-id } 

Report will highlight all the **Program rule actions** which have ProgramRuleActionType set to **HIDEPROGRAMSTAGE** but configuration does not provide any program stage id.

### Invalid program indicator expression { #invalid-program-indicator-expression } 

Reports all the violations in program indicator expression caused by invalid **DataElement** or invalid **TrackedEntityAttribute**.

### Invalid program indicator filter expression { #invalid-program-indicator-filter-expression } 

Reports all the violations in program indicator filter expression caused by invalid **DataElement** or invalid **TrackedEntityAttribute**.

## Maintenance { #data_admin_maintenance } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:data_admin_maintenance-->

<table>
<caption>Data maintenance functions in the Data Administration app</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Function</p></th>
<th><p>Description</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Clear analytics tables</p></td>
<td><p>Completely empties the analytics tables. These tables are used to generate aggregate data for the pivot tables, GIS and reports.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Remove zero data values</p></td>
<td><p>Removes zero data values from the database. Values registered for data elements with aggregation operator average is not removed, as such values will be significant when aggregating the data, contrary to values registered for data elements with aggregation operator sum.</p>
<p>Reducing the number of data values will improve system performance.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Permanently remove soft deleted data values</p></td>
<td><p>When a data value is deleted in DHIS2, the system will mark the corresponding database row as deleted, and not actually delete the row.</p>
<p>Running this maintenance function will physically remove these data value rows from the database.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Prune periods</p></td>
<td><p>Removes all periods which have no registered data values. Reducing the number of periods will improve system performance.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Remove expired invitations</p></td>
<td><p>Will delete users which represent user account invitations that now have gone past their expiry date.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Drop SQL views</p></td>
<td><p>DHIS2 lets you set up and manage SQL views as system objects with corresponding database SQL views.</p>
<p>Running this maintenance function will drop underlying SQL views for all system views. Use the <strong>Create SQL views</strong> function to recreate these SQL views.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Create SQL views</p></td>
<td><p>Recreates all SQL views in the database.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Update category option combinations</p></td>
<td><p>Rebuilds the category option combinations. This may be required after altering the category options which belong to a given category.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Update organisation unit paths</p></td>
<td><p>The organisation unit table in the DHIS2 database has a column &quot;path&quot; which contains a concatenated string of all ancestors in the hierarchy for each organisation unit.</p>
<p>Running this maintenance function will update and ensure that these values are in sync with the current organisation unit hierarchy. This column is managed by DHIS2, but a manual update might be useful when doing data loading directly in the database.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Clear application cache</p></td>
<td><p>Clears the system cache.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Reload apps</p></td>
<td><p>Manually reloads and detects installed DHIS2 apps.</p>
<p>The installed apps are also detected when the system starts and when installing or uninstall apps.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## Resource tables { #dataAdmin_resourceTables } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:dataAdmin_resourceTables-->

Resource tables are supporting tables that are used during analysis of
data. One would typically join the contents of these tables with the
data value table when doing queries from third-party applications like
Microsoft Excel. They are also used extensively by the analysis modules
of DHIS2. Regeneration of the resource tables should only be done once
all data integrity issues are resolved. The resource tables are also
generated automatically, every time the analytics process is run by the
system.

  - Organisation unit structure (\_orgunitstructure)

    This table should be regenerated any time there have been any
    changes made to the organisational unit hierarchy. This table
    provides information about the organisation unit hierarchy. It has
    one row for each organisation unit, one column for each organisation
    unit level and the organisation unit identifiers for all parents in
    the lineage as values.

  - Data element group set structure (\_dataelementgroupsetstructure)

    This table provides information about which data elements are
    members of which data element group sets. The table has one row for
    each data element, one column for each data element group set and
    the names of the data element group as values.

  - Indicator group set structure (\_indicatorgroupsetstructure)

    This table provides information about which indicators are members
    of which indicator group sets. The table has one row for each
    indicator, one column for each indicator group set and the names of
    the indicator group as values.

  - Organisation unit group set structure
    (\_organisationunitgroupsetstructure)

    This table provides information about which organisation units are
    members of which organisation unit group sets. The table has one row
    for each organisation unit, one column for each organisation unit
    group set and the names of the organisation unit groups as values.

  - Category structure (\_categorystructure)

    This table provides information about which data elements are
    members of which categories. The table has one row for each data
    element, one column for each category and the names of the category
    options as values.

  - Data element category option combo name (\_categoryoptioncomboname)

    This table should be regenerated any time there have been changes
    made to the category combination names. It contains readable names
    for the various combinations of categories.

  - Data element structure (\_dataelementstructure)

    This table provides information about all data elements and which
    period type (frequency) they capture data at. The period type is
    determined through the data set membership and hence relies on data
    elements to be member of data sets with similar period types to have
    a defined behaviour.

  - Period structure (\_dataperiodstructure)

    This table provides information about all periods and which period
    type they are associated with. For each period type with lower
    frequency than itself, it contains information about which period it
    will fall within.

  - Data element category option combinations
    (\_dataelementcategoryoptioncombo)

    This table provides a mapping between data elements and all possible
    category option combinations.

## Duplicate data elimination { #dataAdmin_duplicateDataElimination } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:dataAdmin_duplicateDataElimination-->

This function is useful when data has been entered mistakenly for two
data elements which represents the same phenomena.

Start by selecting the data element to eliminate from the list and click
confirm. Then select the data element to keep and click confirm again.
Finally, verify the selection and click merge.

In the situation where data exists for the data element to eliminate and
not for the one to keep, the data will be moved to the one to keep. When
data exists for both data elements, the data which was updated last will
be used. When data exists only for the one to keep, no action will be
taken. The data element to eliminate will eventually be deleted, except
when it is a multidimensional data element and has other data
registered.

## Data statistics { #dataAdmin_dataStatistics } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:dataAdmin_dataStatistics-->

The data statistics module provides an overview of the number of objects
stored in the DHIS2 database.


![](resources/images/maintainence/data_stats.png)

The total number of each type of object is presented in a series of
tables with summary statistics of each object.

## Lock exceptions { #dataAdmin_lockException } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:dataAdmin_lockException-->

Lock exceptions provide fine-grained control over exemption from a
locked data set. After the expiry of the data set, data entry will be
denied by default, unless an exception has been granted through the Lock
exception interface. To enable a lock exception, select the desired
organization units, data sets, and time period and press "Add". By
granting a lock exception, data entry will be enabled even after the
expiry period of the data set has passed.


![](resources/images/maintainence/create_lock_exception.png)

In the example above, a data lock exception would be created for "ab
Abundant Life Organization" and "ab Seventh Day Hospital" for the "Care
and Support" dataset for "February 2012".

## Min-Max Value Generation { #dataAdmin_minMaxValueGeneration } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:dataAdmin_minMaxValueGeneration-->

This administrative function can be used to generate min-max values,
which are used as part of the data quality and validation process for
specific organization units and data sets. Simply select the dataset
from the left hand frame, and then select the required organisation
units to generate the min-max values for from the organisational units
selector on the right. Press the "Generate" button to generate or
regenerate all min-max values. Press "Remove" to remove all min-max
values which are currently stored in the database.

![](resources/images/maintainence/min_max_value_generation.PNG)

## Cache Statistics { #dataAdmin_cacheStatistics } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:dataAdmin_cacheStatistics-->

This option is for system administrators only to use. The cache
statistics shows the status of the application level cache. The
application level cache refers to the objects and query results that the
application is caching in order to speed up performance. If the database
has been modified directly the application cache needs to be cleared for
it to take effect.


# Visualizar las estadísticas de uso { #using_usage_analytics } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:using_usage_analytics-->

## Acerca de la aplicación Analítica de Uso { #about-the-usage-analytics-app } 

![](resources/images/usage_analytics/usage_analytics_interface.png)

La aplicación **Analítica de uso** le permite visualizar estadísticas sobre cómo los usuarios 
están trabajando con las aplicaciones **Tablero**, **Tabla dinámica**, **SIG**, **Visualizador de 
eventos**, **Visualizador de datos** e **Informes de eventos** dentro de 
DHIS2. Con estas estadísticas puede responder a preguntas como:

  - ¿Cuántas veces las personas han cargado gráficos, tablas dinámicas y 
    tableros?

  - ¿Cuántos favoritos han creado los usuarios?

  - ¿Cuántos usuarios están iniciando sesión en comparación con el número total de usuarios?

  - ¿Cuáles son los favoritos más vistos?

## Crear un gráfico de analítica de uso { #usage_analytics_create_chart } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:usage_analytics_create_chart-->

1.  Abrir la aplicación **Analítica de Uso**

2.  Seleccione una **Fecha de inicio** y **Fecha de finalización**.

3.  Seleccionar un **Intervalo**: día, semana mes o año.

4.  Seleccionar una **Categoría**.

    Hay cinco categorías de analíticas:

      - **Vistas favoritas**: Proporciona el número de veces que se han visto varios tipos 
        de favoritos, como gráficos, tablas dinámicas y 
        tableros, a lo largo del tiempo. Este análisis permite alternar entre todos 
        los tipos de favoritos, el total de todos los tipos y el número 
        medio de vistas.

      - **Favoritos**: Proporciona el número de favoritos que se han 
        creado y almacenado en el sistema a lo largo del tiempo.

      - **Usuarios**: Proporciona el número de usuarios activos así como el número 
        total de usuarios a lo largo del tiempo.

      - **Top favoritos**: Muestra los favoritos más vistos en el sistema 
        por tipo.

      - **Valores de datos**: proporciona el número de valores de datos almacenados en 
        el sistema a lo largo del tiempo.

5.  Click **Actualizar**.



# Datastore Manager { #datastore_manager_app } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:datastore_manager_app-->

The Datastore Manager is intended for advanced-level DHIS2 users. Before
you use the Datastore Manager, you can read more about the Data store
here: [DHIS2 data
store](https://docs.dhis2.org/master/en/developer/html/webapi_data_store.html).

## Using the Datastore Manager { #using-the-datastore-manager } 

The Datastore Manager lets you manage the content of the web API data
stores. This is helpful when managing apps and external scripts.

## Add a new namespace and key to the Datastore Manager { #add-a-new-namespace-and-key-to-the-datastore-manager } 

Note: You have to create a namespace before you can add a key to it.

1.  Click en **Nuevo**.

2.  Enter a name for the namespace you want to create.

3.  Enter a key name, and select **Create**. The new namespace displays
    in the left pane.

## Add a key to an existing namespace in the Datastore Manager { #add-a-key-to-an-existing-namespace-in-the-datastore-manager } 

To add a new key to an existing namespace in the Datastore Manager,

1.  Select the namespace you want to add a key to.

2.  Click the options menu, and click **New key**.

    ![](resources/images/datastore_manager/datamgr_add_key.png)

3.  Enter a key name in the New key dialog box.

4.  Click **Create**. The new key is added to the namespace you
    selected.

## Delete a namespace or key from the Datastore Manager { #delete-a-namespace-or-key-from-the-datastore-manager } 

To delete a namespace, or key, click the Options menu, and then click
**Delete**, and then **Delete** again. Note that if you delete the only
key in a namespace, you will also delete the namespace it belongs to.

## Search for namespaces or keys { #search-for-namespaces-or-keys } 

Use the search tool in the top left corner to search for namespaces and
keys as follows:

  - Enter a namespace name followed by **\#** and the key name to search
    for a specific key in a namespace.

  - Enter **\#** followed by the name of a key to search for keys
only.

![](resources/images/datastore_manager/datamgr_search_namespaces_keys.png)

## Search your JSON library { #search-your-json-library } 

Use the search tool in the workspace toolbar to search your JSON
library.

![](resources/images/datastore_manager/datamgr_searchJSON.png)

## Edit namespaces or keys in the Datastore Manager { #edit-namespaces-or-keys-in-the-datastore-manager } 

Use the **Search** tool to find namespaces or keys in your datastore.
When you edit your content, you can toggle between the **Tree** view and
the **Code** view. Use the **Tree** view to get an overview of the
contents of the Datastore. Use the **Code** view to edit your code
directly in the code editor. Remember to save your work by clicking the
**Save** button.

![](resources/images/datastore_manager/datamgr_treeview.png)

In the Code view, you can edit your code. When you edit a line of code,
it is highlighted in yellow.

![](resources/images/datastore_manager/datamgr_codeview.png)

Any errors are marked by the editor. If you hover over the error icon,
you can view a short description of the error.

![](resources/images/datastore_manager/datamgr_editcode_error.png)



# About data dimensions { #data_dimensions } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:data_dimensions-->

## Data dimensions: Core building blocks in DHIS2 { #data-dimensions-core-building-blocks-in-dhis2 } 

A data value in DHIS2 is described by at least three dimensions: 1) data
element, 2) organisation unit, and 3) period. These dimensions form the
core building blocks of the data model.

![](resources/images/data_dimensions/datavalue_with_dimensions.png)

As an example, if you want to know how many children that were immunised
for measles in Gerehun CHC in December 2014, the three dimensions which
describe that value are the data element "Measles doses given", the
organisation unit "Gerehun CHC", and the period "December 2014". All
data values have at least these three dimensions describing *what*,
*where*, and *when*.

In addition to the data element, organisation unit, and period
dimensions, data values may also be associated with additional data
dimensions. A common use of this feature is to describe data values
which are reported by multiple partners in the same location for the
same data element and time period. In principle, it can be used as a
"free-form" dimension, to describe multiple observations of the same
phenomena at the same place and time. For more information about this,
see Chapter 34: Additional data dimensions.

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Organisation Unit</th>
<th>Data Element</th>
<th>Period</th>
<th>Value</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Gerehun CHC</td>
<td>Measles doses given</td>
<td>Dec-09</td>
<td>22</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Tugbebu CHP</td>
<td>Measles doses given</td>
<td>Dec-09</td>
<td>18</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## Data elements: the *what* dimension { #data-elements-the-what-dimension } 

### Data element categories { #data-element-categories } 

The data element mentioned above ,"Measles doses given", can be further
disaggregated into by combinations of data element categories. Each
system administrator of DHIS2 is free to define any data element
category dimensions for data elements. There are however, certain best
practices which should generally be followed.

Given the example of Measles vaccination, if you want to know whether
these vaccines were given at the facility (fixed) or out in the
community as part of the outreach services then you could add a
dimension called e.g. "Place of service" with the two possible options
"Fixed" and "Outreach". Then all data collected on measles immunisation
would have to be disaggregated along these to options. In addition to
this you might be interested in knowing how many of these children who
were under 1 year or above 1 year of age. If so you can add an Age
dimension to the data element with the two possible options "\<1 y" and
"\>1 y". This implies further detail on the data collection process. You
can also apply both categories "Place of service" and "Age" and combine
these into a data element category combination e.g. called "EPI
disaggregation". You would then be able to look at four different more
detailed values in stead of only one as in the example above for the
data element "Measles doses given": 1) "Fixed and \<1 y, 2) Fixed and
\>1 y, 3) Outreach and \<1 y, and 4) Outreach and \>1 y. This adds
complexity to how data is collected by the health facilities, but at the
same time opens up for new possibilities of detailed data analysis of
Measles immunisation.

<table>
<caption>Example of detailed storage of data values when using data element categories &quot;Place of Service&quot; and &quot;Age&quot; (simplified for readability compared to the actual database table)</caption>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Organisation Unit</th>
<th>Data Element</th>
<th>Place of service</th>
<th>Age</th>
<th>Period</th>
<th>Value</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Gerehun CHC</td>
<td>Measles doses given</td>
<td>Fixed</td>
<td>&lt;1 y</td>
<td>Dec-09</td>
<td>12</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Gerehun CHC</td>
<td>Measles doses given</td>
<td>Outreach</td>
<td>&lt;1 y</td>
<td>Dec-09</td>
<td>4</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Gerehun CHC</td>
<td>Measles doses given</td>
<td>Fixed</td>
<td>&gt;1 y</td>
<td>Dec-09</td>
<td>4</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Gerehun CHC</td>
<td>Measles doses given</td>
<td>Outreach</td>
<td>&gt;1 y</td>
<td>Dec-09</td>
<td>2</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Tugbebu CHP</td>
<td>Measles doses given</td>
<td>Fixed</td>
<td>&lt;1 y</td>
<td>Dec-09</td>
<td>10</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Tugbebu CHP</td>
<td>Measles doses given</td>
<td>Outreach</td>
<td>&lt;1 y</td>
<td>Dec-09</td>
<td>4</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Tugbebu CHP</td>
<td>Measles doses given</td>
<td>Fixed</td>
<td>&gt;1 y</td>
<td>Dec-09</td>
<td>3</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Tugbebu CHP</td>
<td>Measles doses given</td>
<td>Outreach</td>
<td>&gt;1 y</td>
<td>Dec-09</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### Data element group sets { #data-element-group-sets } 

While the data element categories and their options described above
provide the level of detail (disaggregation) at the point of data
collection and how data values get stored in the database, the data
element group sets and groups can be used to add more information to
data elements after data collection. As an example, if you are analysing
many data elements at the same time in a report, you would want to group
these based on some criteria. Instead of looking at all the data
captured in a form for immunisation and nutrition, you might want to
separate or group data elements along a programme dimension (known as a
data element group set in DHIS2) where "Immunisation" (or EPI) and
"Nutrition" would be the two groups.

Expanding the report to include data from other programs or larger
themes of health data would mean more groups to such a group set
dimension, like "Malaria", "Reproductive Health", "Stocks". For this
example, you would create a data element group set called "Programme"
(or whatever name you find appropriate), and to represent the different
programmes in this dimension you would define data elements groups
called "EPI", "Nutrition", "Malaria", "Reproductive health" and so on,
and add all these groups to the "Programme" group set. To link or tag
the data element "Measles doses given" to such a dimension you must (in
our example) add it to the "EPI" group. Which groups you add "Measles
doses given" to does not affect how health facilities collect the data,
but adds more possibilities to your data analysis. So for the group set
dimensions there are three levels; the group set (e.g. "Programme"), the
group (e.g. "EPI"), and the data element (e.g. "Measles doses given").

Indicators can be grouped into indicator groups and further into
indicator group sets (dimensions) in exactly the same way as data
elements.

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Organisation Unit</th>
<th>Data Element</th>
<th>Programme</th>
<th>Period</th>
<th>Value</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Gerehun CHC</td>
<td>Measles doses given</td>
<td>EPI</td>
<td>Dec-09</td>
<td>22</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Gerehun CHC</td>
<td>Vitamin A given</td>
<td>Nutrition</td>
<td>Dec-09</td>
<td>16</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Tugbebu CHP</td>
<td>Measles doses given</td>
<td>EPI</td>
<td>Dec-09</td>
<td>18</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Tugbebu CHP</td>
<td>Vitamin A given</td>
<td>Nutrition</td>
<td>Dec-09</td>
<td>12</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Gerehun CHC</td>
<td>Malaria new cases</td>
<td>Malaria</td>
<td>Dec-09</td>
<td>32</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Tugbebu CHP</td>
<td>Malaria new cases</td>
<td>Malaria</td>
<td>Dec-09</td>
<td>23</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## Organisation units: the *where* dimension { #organisation-units-the-where-dimension } 

Organisation units in DHIS2 should typically represent a location, such
as a Community Health Centre or referral hospitals, or an administrative
unit like "MoHS Sierra Leone", "Bo District" or "Baoma Chiefdom". In
non-health sector applications, they could be "schools" or "water
points". Orgunits are represented in a default hierarchy, usually the
default administrative hierarchy of a country or region, and are
therefore assigned an organisational level. As an example, Sierra Leone
has four organisation unit levels; National, District, Chiefdom, and
PHU, and all orgunits are linked to one of these levels. An orgunit
hierarchy in DHIS2 can have any number of levels. Normally data is
collected at the lowest level, at the health facility, but can be
collected at any level within the hierarchy, such as both the districts
as well as the facility level.

When designing reports at higher levels with data aggregated at the
district or province level, DHIS2 will use the hierarchy structure to
aggregate all the health facilities' data for any given unit at any
level. The organisation unit level capturing the data always represents
the lowest level of detail that is possible to use in data analysis, and
the organisational levels define the available levels of aggregation
along a geographical dimension.

### Organisation unit group sets and groups { #organisation-unit-group-sets-and-groups } 

While facility level is typically the lowest geographical level for
disaggregation in DHIS2, there are ways to flexibly group organisation
units into any number of dimensions by using the organisation unit
groups and group set functionality. As an example, if all facilities are
given an official type like "Community health center" or "District
Hospital, it is possible to create an organisation unit group set called
"Type" and add groups with the names of the types mentioned above. In
order for the group sets to function properly in analysis, each
organisation unit should be a member of a single group (compulsory and
exclusive) within a group set. Stated somewhat differently, a facility
should not be both a "Community health center" as well as a "District
hospital".

#### Inherit the values of an organisation unit group set { #inherit-the-values-of-an-organisation-unit-group-set } 

You can improve the completeness of your aggregated data by inheriting
the settings of a "parent" organisation unit in your organisation unit
hierarchy. This is particularly helpful if you are aggregating the data
of more than 100 organisation units. See the
[Maintenance](https://docs.dhis2.org/master/en/user/html/manage_organisation_unit.html#create_organisation_unit_group_set)
app documentation for more
details.

#### Alternative organisation unit hierarchies - advanced use of group sets and groups { #alternative-organisation-unit-hierarchies-advanced-use-of-group-sets-and-groups } 

A more advanced use of organisation unit group sets is to create
alternative hierarchies e.g. use administrative borders from other
ministries. In Sierra Leone that could mean an alternative hierarchy of
1:MoHS, 2:Districts, and 3: Local councils, instead of the four-level
hierarchy with chiefdoms and PHUs. For instance, if all PHUs are linked
to a specific local council, it would be possible to look at data
aggregated by local council instead of chiefdom. Then you would first
need to create a group set called "Local council" and then create one
organisation unit group for every local council, and finally link all
PHUs to their corresponding local council group.

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>District</th>
<th>OrgUnit Type</th>
<th>Data Element</th>
<th>Period</th>
<th>Value</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Bo</td>
<td>CHC</td>
<td>Measles doses given</td>
<td>Dec-09</td>
<td>121</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Bo</td>
<td>CHP</td>
<td>Measles doses given</td>
<td>Dec-09</td>
<td>98</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Bo</td>
<td>MCHP</td>
<td>Measles doses given</td>
<td>Dec-09</td>
<td>87</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Bombali</td>
<td>CHC</td>
<td>Measles doses given</td>
<td>Dec-09</td>
<td>110</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Bombali</td>
<td>CHP</td>
<td>Measles doses given</td>
<td>Dec-09</td>
<td>67</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Bombali</td>
<td>MCHP</td>
<td>Measles doses given</td>
<td>Dec-09</td>
<td>59</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### Best practice on the use of group sets and groups { #best-practice-on-the-use-of-group-sets-and-groups } 

As mentioned above, all organisation units should be a member of a
single group within a group set. If an organisation unit is not present
in any group or is present in multiple group members in a group set,
this can lead to unexpected results in the analysis modules. DHIS2 has
integrity checks to identify organisation units which are not present in
any organisation unit group set member, or which is present in multiple
groups.

## Period: the *when* dimension { #period_types } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:period_types-->

The period dimension becomes an important factor when analysing data
over time e.g. when looking at cumulative data, when creating quarterly
or annual aggregated reports, or when doing analysis that combines data
with different characteristics like monthly routine data, annual
census/population data or six-monthly staff data.

### Period types { #period-types } 

In DHIS2, periods are organised according to a set of fixed period types
described below. The following list is for the default ISO 8601 calendar
type.

1.  Daily

2.  Weekly: The system supports various weekly period types, with
    Monday, Wednesday, Thursday, Saturday and Sunday as the first day of
    the week. You collect data through data sets configured to use the
    desired weekly period type. The analytics engine will attribute
    weekly data to the month which contains four days or more of the
    week.

3.  Bi-weekly: Two week periods beginning with the first week of the
    year.

4.  Monthly: Refers to standard calendar months.

5.  BiMonthly: Two-month periods beginning in January.

6.  Quarterly: Standard ISO quarters, beginning in January.

7.  SixMonthly: Six-month periods beginning in January

8.  Yearly: This refers to a calendar year.

9.  Financial April: Financial year period beginning on April 1st and
    ending on March 31st of the calendar next year

10. Financial July: Financial year period beginning on July 1st and
    ending on June 31st of the calendar next year

11. Financial Oct: Financial year period beginning on October 1st and
    ending on September 31st of the calendar next year

12. Six-monthly April: Six-month periods beginning on April 1st with a
    duration of six calendar months.

As a general rule, all organisation units should collect the same data
using the same frequency or periodicity. A data entry form therefore is
associated with a single period type to make sure data is always
collected according to the correct and same periodicity across the
country.

It is possible however to collect the same data elements using different
period types by assigning the same data elements to multiple data sets
with different period types, however then it becomes crucial to make
sure no organisation unit is collecting data using both data sets/period
types as that would create overlap and duplication of data values. If
configured correctly the aggregation service in DHIS2 will aggregate the
data together, e.g. the monthly data from one part of the country with
quarterly data from another part of the country into a national
quarterly report. For simplicity and to avoid data duplication it is
advised to use the same period type for all organisation units for the
same data elements when possible.

### Relative periods { #relative-periods } 

In addition to the fixed period types described in the previous section,
DHIS2 also support relative periods for use in the analysis modules.

When creating analytical resources within DHIS2 it is possible to make
use of the relative periods functionality. The simplest scenario is when
you want to design a monthly report that can be reused every month
without having to make changes to the report template to accommodate for
the changes in period. The relative period called "Last month" allows
for this, and the user can at the time of report generation through a
report parameter select the month to use in the report.

A slightly more advanced use case is when you want to make a monthly
summary report for immunisation and want to look at the data from the
current (reporting) month together with a cumulative value for the year
so far. The relative period called "This year" provides such a
cumulative value relative to the reporting month selecting when running
the report. Other relative periods are the last 3,6, or 12 months
periods which are cumulative values calculated back from the selected
reporting month. If you want to create a report with data aggregated by
quarters (the ones that have passed so far in the year) you can select
"Last four quarters". Other relative periods are described under the
reporting table section of the manual.

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Organisation Unit</th>
<th>Data Element</th>
<th>Reporting month</th>
<th>So far this year</th>
<th>Reporting month name</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Gerehun CHC</td>
<td>Measles doses given</td>
<td>15</td>
<td>167</td>
<td>Oct-09</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Tugbebu CHP</td>
<td>Measles doses given</td>
<td>17</td>
<td>155</td>
<td>Oct-09</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### Aggregation of periods { #aggregation-of-periods } 

While data needs to be collected on a given frequency to standardise
data collection and management, this does not put limitations on the
period types that can be used in data analysis and reports. Just like
data gets aggregated up the organisational hierarchy, data is also
aggregated according to a period hierarchy, so you can create quarterly
and annual reports based on data that is being collected on a Monthly
basis. The defined period type for a data entry form (data set) defines
the lowest level of period detail possible in a report.

#### Sum and average aggregation along the period dimension { #sum-and-average-aggregation-along-the-period-dimension } 

When aggregating data on the period dimension there are two options for
how the calculation is done, namely sum or average. This option is
specified on a per data element in DHIS2 through the use of the
'aggregation operator' attribute in the Add/Edit Data Elements dialog.

Most of the data collected on a routinely basis should be aggregated by
summing up the months or weeks, for instance to create a quarterly
report on Measles immunisation one would sum up the three monthly values
for "Measles doses given".

Other types of data that are more permanently valid over time like
"Number of staff in the PHU" or an annual population estimate of
"Population under 1 year" need to be aggregated differently. These
values are static for all months as long as there are valid data. For
example, the "Estimated population under 1", calculated from the census
data ,is the same for all months of a given year, or the number of
nurses working in a given facility is the same for every month in the 6
months period the number is reported for.

This difference becomes important when calculating an annual value for
the indicator morbidity service burden for a facility. The monthly
head-counts are summed up for the 12 months to get the annual headcount,
while the number of staff for the PHU is calculated as the average of
the two 6-monthly values reported through the 6-monthly staff report. So
in this example the data element "OPD headcount" would have the
aggregation operator "SUM" and the data element "Number of staff" would
have it set to "AVERAGE".

Another important feature of average data elements is the validity
period concept. Average data values are standing values for any period
type within the borders of the period they are registered for. For
example, an annual population estimate following the calendar year, will
have the same value for any period that falls within that year no matter
what the period type. If the population under 1 for a given facility is
250 for the year of 2015 that means that the value will be 250 for
Jan-15, for Q3-15, for Week 12 of 2015 and for any period within 2015.
This has implications for how coverage indicators are calculated, as the
full annual population will be used as denominator value even when doing
monthly reports. If you want to look at an estimated annual coverage
value for a given month, then you will have the option of setting the
indicator to "Annualised" which means that a monthly coverage value will
be multiplied by a factor of 12, a quarterly value by 4, in order to
generate an effective yearly total. The annualised indicator feature can
therefore be used to mimic the use of monthly population estimates.

## Data collection vs. data analysis { #data-collection-vs-data-analysis } 

### Data collection and storage { #data-collection-and-storage } 

Datasets determine what raw data that is available in the system, as
they describe how data is collected in terms of periodicity as well as
spatial extent. Data sets define the building blocks of the data to be
captured and stored in DHIS2. For each data dimension we decide what
level of detail the data should be collected at namely 1) the data
element (e.g. diagnosis, vaccine, or any event taking place) and its
categories (e.g. age and gender), 2) the period/frequency dimension, and
3) the organisation unit dimension. For any report or data analysis you
can never retrieve more detailed data than what is defined in the data
sets, so the design of the datasets and their corresponding data entry
forms (the data collection tools) dictate what kind of data analysis
will be possible.

### Input does not equal Output { #input-does-not-equal-output } 

It is important to understand that the data entry forms or datasets
themselves are not intrinsically linked to the underlying data value and
that the meaning of data is only described by the data element (and its
categories). This makes it perfectly safe to modify datasets and forms
without altering the data (as long as the data elements stay the same).
This loose coupling between forms and data makes DHIS2 flexible when it
comes to designing and changing new forms and in providing exactly the
form the users want.

Another benefit of only linking data to data elements and not to forms,
is the flexibility of creating indicators and validation rules based on
data elements, and also in providing any kind of output report (in pivot
tables, charts, maps etc.) that can combine data individually or across
forms, e.g. to correlate data from different health programs. Due to
this flexibility of enabling integration of data from various programs
(forms) and sources (routine and semi permanent (population, staff,
equipment)) a DHIS2 database is used as an integrated data repository
for many or all parts of the aggregated data in a larger HIS. The figure
below illustrates this flexibility.

![](resources/images/data_dimensions/dhis_input_output.jpg)

In this example, we see that data elements from multiple forms can be
combined to create a given indicator. As a more concrete example, one
might collect "Population under one year of age" in an annual data set
by district, and then collect a data element like "Fully immunized
children" by month at the facility level. By annualizing the population,
we can generate an approximation of the effective monthly population,
and combining this with the aggregate total of the number of fully
immunized children by month, it would be possible to generate an
indicator "Fully immunized coverage", consisting of the aggregated
total of children who are fully immunized, divided by the effective
monthly population.

## Extended examples of data elements and forms { #extended-examples-of-data-elements-and-forms } 

The table below combines data element the two group sets Diagnosis (all
the diseases) and Morbidity/Mortality (New cases, Follow-ups, Referrals,
Deaths) with the data element category PHU/Community. Deaths are
captured in a separate form with other dimensions (e.g. the
PHU/Community) than morbidity.

![](resources/images/data_dimensions/Ex_table1.jpg)

This output table combines the two data element categories HIV\_Age and
Gender with the data element group set ART Group. The group enables
subtotals for staging and entry points summing up the data elements in
that group. Subtotals for either age groups and gender would be other
possible columns to easily include here.

![](resources/images/data_dimensions/Ex_table2.jpg)

## How this works in pivot tables { #how-this-works-in-pivot-tables } 

When doing data analysis in Excel pivot tables or any other OLAP based
tool the dimensions become extremely powerful in providing many
different views into the data. Each data element category or group set
become a pivot field, and the options or groups become values within
each of these fields. In fact categories and groupsets are treated
exactly the same way in pivot tables, and so are orgunits, periods, and
data elements. All these become dimensions to the data value that can be
used to rearrange, pivot, filter, and to drill down into the data. Here
we will show some examples of how the data dimensions are used in pivot
tables.

Using the example of morbidity and mortality data, a pivot table can
show how the dimensions can be used to view data for different
aggregation levels.

The completely aggregated number is viewed when none of the pivot fields
are arranged in the table area, as column or row fields, but are listed
above the table itself as page field (filter).

![](resources/images/data_dimensions/pivot_overview_1.jpg)

Here we have selected to look at the Morbidity total. The various data
elements on morbidity have been ordered into the main\_de\_groups
Morbidity (we will get back to Mortality later). The fields above the
table itself are all set to "All", meaning that the totals in the table
will contain data from all Countries, Districts, Chiefdom, ou\_type,
year, months, the various categories as listed in the red fields, and
all data elements in the Morbidity group.

As we have seen, this is not a very useful representation, as Morbidity
is organized into new cases, follow-ups, referrals, and then again in
age groups. Also, we do not see the various diagnoses. The first step is
to include the diagnoses field (which is a group set), which is done by
dragging the "diagnosis" field down to be a row field, as shown in the
figure below, and to add the group set called "morbiditymortality" in
the column field to display new cases, follow-up, and referrals.

![](resources/images/data_dimensions/pivot_diagnoses.jpg)

Contrast this figure above to the one below.

![](resources/images/data_dimensions/pivot_dataelements.jpg)

They both show the same data (some of the rows have been cut in the
screenshot due to image size), albeit in a different way.

  - The "dataelement" field, used in the bottom figure, displays each
    diagnosis as three elements; one follow-up, one new, and one
    referrals. This is the way the data elements have been defined in
    DHIS2, as this makes sense for aggregation. You would not like to
    aggregate follow-ups and new, thus these have not been made as
    categories, the whole point of is to ease aggregation and
    disaggregation.

  - The "diagnosis" group set has instead been made to lump these three
    (follow-up, new, referrals) together, which can then be split with
    another group set, namely the one called "morbiditymortality". This
    allows us to organize the data as in the first of the two figures,
    where we have the single diagnosis per row, and the groups new,
    follow-up, referrals as rows.

The idea of using group sets is that you can combine, in any set,
different data elements. Thus, if we add the mortality data (by checking
it from the drop-down menu of the main\_de\_groups field, and moving
this field out of the table) we can see also the deaths, since the
mortality data elements have been included as a "death" group in the
"morbiditymortality" group set. The result is shown below.

![](resources/images/data_dimensions/pivot_diagnoses_all.jpg)

The result is a much more user-friendly pivot table. Now, another figure
shows the relationship between the group sets and elements (these are
fake data values).

This small detail of the pivot table show how the actual data elements
link to the group sets:

  - The four data elements, as defined in DHIS2, are Measles death,
    Measles follow-up, Measles new, and Measles referrals

  - They all belong to the group set "diagnosis", where they have been
    lumped together in the group Measles

  - The group set "morbiditymortality" contains the groups New cases,
    Follow-up, Referrals, and Deaths.

  - Only the data element Measles deaths has data related to the group
    Deaths, thus this is where the data value (20) is shown, at the
    upper right corner. The same for Measles new; the value (224) is
    shown at the intersection of the data element Measles new and the
    group New cases (in the group set morbiditymortality)

  - All the intersections where the data element does not link with the
    groups in morbiditymortality are left blank. Thus in this case we
    would get a nice table if we excluded the data element from the
    table, and just had diagnosis and the group set morbiditymortality,
    as in the figure shown earlier

Now lets see how the data element categories can be used. In the data
entry form for Morbidity the new cases and follow-ups use one age
category, the referral data another,, and the mortality data a third age
breakup, so these are available as three individual age group fields in
the pivot tables called morbidity\_age, referrals\_age and
mortality\_age. It doesn't make sense to use these while looking at
these data together (as in the examples above), but e.g. if we only want
to look at the only the new cases we can put the MobidityMortalityGroups
field back up as a page field and there select the New cases group as a
filter. Then we can drag the Morbidity\_age field down to the column
area and we get the following view:

![](resources/images/data_dimensions/pivot_morb_age.jpg)

The following table illustrates the benefits of reusing data element
categories across datasets and category combinations. The VCCT, ART and
PMTCT data are collected in three different datasets, the first two with
both gender and age breakdown, and the PMTCT only age (gender is given).
All three share the same age groups and therefore it is possible to view
data elements from all these three datasets in the same table and use
the age dimension. In the previous example with morbidity and mortality
data this was not possible since new cases, referrals and deaths all
have different age groups.

![](resources/images/data_dimensions/pivot_hiv_age.jpg)

In the table below PMTCT data has been removed from the table and the
gender category added to the column area so that you can analyse the
data for VCCT and ART by age and gender. An optional subtotal for gender
has also been added, as well as a grand total for all age and
gender.

![](resources/images/data_dimensions/pivot_hiv_age_gender.jpg)

## Case study: From paper forms to multidimensional datasets - lessons learned { #case-study-from-paper-forms-to-multidimensional-datasets-lessons-learned } 

Typically the design of a DHIS2 dataset is based on some requirements
from a paper form that is already in use. The logic of paper forms are
not the same as the data element and data set model of DHIS2, e.g. often
a field in a tabular paper form is described both by column headings and
text on each row, and sometimes also with some introductory table
heading that provides more context. In the database this is captured in
one atomic data element with no reference to a position in a visual
table format, so it is important to make sure the data element with the
optional data element categories capture the full meaning of each
individual field in the paper form.

Another important thing to have in mind while designing datasets is that
the dataset and the corresponding data entry form (which is a dataset
with layout) is a data collection tool and not a report or analysis
tool. There are other far more sophisticated tools for data output and
reporting in DHIS2 than the data entry forms. Paper forms are often
designed with both data collection and reporting in mind and therefore
you might see things such as cumulative values (in addition to the
monthly values), repetition of annual data (the same population data
reported every month) or even indicator values such as coverage rates in
the same form as the monthly raw data. When you store the raw data in
DHIS2 every month and have all the processing power you need within the
computerised tool there is no need (in fact it would be stupid and most
likely cause inconsistency) to register manually calculated values such
as the ones mentioned above. You only want to capture the raw data in
your datasets/forms and leave the calculations to the computer, and
presentation of such values to the reporting tools in
DHIS2.

### From tables to category combinations - designing multi-dimensional data sets { #from-tables-to-category-combinations-designing-multi-dimensional-data-sets } 

As we have seen in the examples above, data element categories and
category options are helpful in representing tabular data, when adding
dimensions to a field in a paper form. We have also seen how the data
element is one of the required dimensions which describe data in DHIS2.
As we will see in the example below there are often more than one way to
represent a paper form in DHIS2 , and it can be difficult to know which
dimension to represent with a data element name and which to represent
as categories, or even as groups as we have seen above. Here are some
general lessons learned from working with data element and category
combinations:

  - Design your dimensions with data use in mind, not data collection.
    This means that disaggregation of data values at collection time
    should be easily aggregated up along the various dimensions, as in
    adding up to a meaningful total.

  - Reuse dimensions as much as possible as this increases the ability
    to compare disaggregated data (e.g. age groups, fixed/outreach,
    gender).

  - Disaggregation dimensions should add up to a total. In certain
    cases, data elements may be collected a subsets of each other. In
    this case, use of categories to disaggregate the data element should
    not be used. As an example, we might collect "Number of confirmed
    malaria cases" and disaggregate this by "Under 5" and "Over 5". A
    third data element "Number of confirmed malaria cases under 1" might
    also exist on the form. It would seem reasonable then to create
    three age groups : Under 1, Under 5 and Over 5, to describe the
    disaggregation. However, the Under 1 is actually a subset of the
    Under 5 group, and when totalled, would result in duplication. Thus,
    categories should be generally be composed of mutually exclusive
    category options, such that the sum of individual category options
    results in a coherent total.

  - Different levels of dimensions; 1) disaggregation and 2) grouping.
    Disaggregation dimensions dictate how you collect and how detailed
    you store your data, so plan these carefully. The group dimension is
    more flexible and can be changed and added to even after data
    collection (think of it as tagging).

  - It is best to think of how the data would be used in an integrated
    data repository and not how it will actually be collected on forms
    or by programs when designing the meta-data model. Ideally, the same
    type of disaggregation should be used across forms and datasets for
    data elements which will be analysed together, or used to build
    indicators. Reuse definitions so that the database can integrate
    even though the forms themselves might be duplicated (which in
    practice, is often the case).

In order to better explain the approach and the possibilities we present
an example paper form and will walk through it step by step and design
data elements, categories, category options and category combinations.

![](resources/images/data_dimensions/PHUF3.jpg)

This form has many tables and each of them potentially represent a data
element category combination (from now on referred to as a catcombo). As
such there is no restriction on a dataset to only have one set of
dimensions or catcombo, it can have many and as we see above this is
necessary as the dimensions are very different from table to table. In
the following paragraphs, we will analyse how to break down this form
into its component pieces and suggest an implementation pathway in
DHIS2.

**ANC table**. This table in the top left corner is one the simpler ones
in this form. It has two dimensions, the first column with the ANC
activity or service (1st visit, IPT 2nd dose etc) and the second and
third column which represent the place where the service was given with
the two options "Fixed" and "Outreach". Since the ANC service is the key
phenomena to analyse here, and often there is a need for looking at the
total of "ANC 1st visits" no matter where they actually took placed, it
makes a lot of sense to use this dimension as the data element
dimension.

Thus, all items on the first column from "1st ANC" visit to "2nd IPT
dose given by TBA" are represented as individual data elements. The
"where" dimension is represented as a data element category (from now on
referred to as category) with the name "fixed/outreach" with the two
data element category options (from now on catoptions) "fixed" and
"outreach". There is no other dimension here so we add a new catcombo
with the name "Fixed/Outreach" with one category "Fixed/Outreach".
Strictly speaking there is another dimension in this table, and that is
the at PHU or by TBA dimension which is repeated for the two doses of
IPT, but since none of the other ANC services listed have this dimension
it does not seem like a good idea to separate out two data elements from
this table and give them another catcombo with both fixed/outreach and
at PHU/by TBA. reusing the same catcombo for all the ANC services makes
more sense since it will be easier to look at these together in reports
etc. and also the fact that there is not much to lose by repeating the
at PHU or by TBA information as part of the data element name when it is
only for four data elements in a table of eleven data elements.

**DELIVERY table.** This table is more tricky as it has a lot of
information and you can see that not all the rows have the same columns
(some columns are merged and a one field is greyed out/disabled.). If we
start by looking at the first column "Deliveries assisted by" that seems
to be one dimension, but only down to the "Untrained TBA" row, as the
remaining three rows are not related to who assisted the delivery at
all. Another dimension is the place of delivery, either In PHU or in
Community as stated on the top column headings. These deliveries are
further split into the outcome of the delivery, whether it is a live or
still birth, which seems to be another dimension. So if we disregard the
three bottom rows for a moment there seems to be 3 dimensions here, 1)
assisted by, 2) place of delivery, and 3) delivery outcome. The key
decision to make is what to use as the data element, the main dimension,
the total that you will most often use and want easily available in
reports and data analysis.

In this case, the outcome dimension as "Total live births" is a very
commonly used value in many indicators (maternal mortality ratio, births
attended by skilled health personnel etc.). In this case the "Assisted
By" dimension could also have been used without any problem, but the
added value of easily getting the total live births information was the
decisive point for us. This means that from this table (or sub-table of
row 1 to 6) there are only two data elements; "Live births" and "Still
births".

Next, there are two more dimensions, the "PHU/Community" with its two
options and a "Births attended by" with options ("MCH Aides", "SECHN",
"Midwives", "CHO", "Trained TBA", "Untrained TBA"). These two categories
make up the catcombo "Births" which is assigned to the two data elements
"Live births" and "Still births". Considering the final three rows of
the delivery table we can see that "Complicated Deliveries" does not
have the assisted by dimension, but has the place and the outcome. "Low
birth weight" also does not have the assisted by dimension and not the
outcome either. The LLITN given after delivery does not have any
additional dimension at all. Since not any of the three rows can share
catcombo with any other row we decided to represent these fields as so
called flat data elements, meaning data elements with no categories at
all, and simply adding the additional information from the column
headings to the data element name, and therefore ended up with the
following data elements with the default (same as none) catcombo;
"Complicated deliveries in PHU live birth", "Complicated deliveries in
PHU still births", "Complicated deliveries in community live birth",
"Complicated deliveries in community still births", "Low birth weight in
PHU", "Low birth weight in community", and "LLITN given after delivery".

**POST-NATAL CARE table** This table is simple and we used the same
approach as for the ANC table. 3 data elements listed in the first
column and then link these to the catcombo called "fixed/outreach".
Reusing the same category fixed/outreach for these data elements enables
analysis on fixed/outreach together with ANC data and other data using
the same category.

**TT table** This table is somewhat more complex than the previous
examples.We decided to use "TT1", "TT2" ... "TT5" as data elements which
makes it easy to get the total of each one of these. There is
fixed/outreach dimension here, but there is also the "In school place"
that is only applied to the Non-Pregnant, or more correctly to any of
the two as the school immunisation is done whether the girls are
pregnant or not. We consulted the program people behind the form and
found out that it would be OK to register all school TT immunisations as
non-pregnant, which simplifies the model a bit since we can reuse the
"TT1" to "TT5" data elements. So we ended up with a new category called
"TT place" with the three options (Fixed, Outreach, In School), and
another category called "Pregnant/Non-pregnant" with two options. The
new catcombo "TT" is then a combination of these two and applied to the
5 TT data elements. Since we agreed to put all In Schools immunisations
under Non-pregnant in means that the combination of options (Pregnant+In
School) will never be used in any data entry form, and hence become a
possible optioncombo, which is OK. As long as the form is custom
designed then you can choose which combinations of options to use or
not, and therefore it is not a problem to have such passive or unused
catoptions. Having school as one option in the TT place category
simplifies the model and therefore we thought it was worth it. The
alternative would be to create 5 more data elements for "TT1 in school"
... "TT5 in school", but then it would be a bit confusing to add these
together with the "TT1" ..."TT5" plus TT catcombo. Having school as a
place in the TT place category makes it a lot easier to get the total of
TT1.. TT5 vaccines given, which are the most important numbers and most
often used values for data analysis.

**Complications of early and late pregnancy and labour tables** We treat
these two tables as one, and will explain why. These two tables are a
bit confusing and not the best design. The most important data coming
out of these tables are the pregnancy complications and the maternal
deaths. These data elements contain further detail on the cause of the
complication or death (the first column in both tables), as well as a
place of death (in PHU or community), and an outcome of the complication
(when its not a death) that can be either "Managed at PHU" or "
Referred". We decided to create two data elements for these two tables;
"Pregnancy complications", and "Maternal Deaths", and two category
combinations, one for each of the data elements. For the Pregnancy
Complications data element there are two additional dimensions, the
cause of the complication (the combined list of the first column in the
two tables) and the outcome (managed at PHU or Referred), so these are
the categories and options that make up that category combination. For
the "Maternal deaths" data element the same category with the different
causes are used and then another category for the place of death (in PHU
or In community). This way the two data elements can share one category
and it will be easy to derive the total number of pregnancy
complications and maternal deaths. While the list of complications on
the paper form is divided into two (early and late/labour) you can see
that e.g. the malaria in 2nd and 3rd trimester are listed under early,
but in fact are for a later phase of the pregnancy. There is no clear
divide between early and late complications in the form, and therefore
we gave up trying to make this distinction in the database.

**Family Planning Services table** This table has 2 dimensions, the
family planning method (contraceptive) and whether the client is new or
continuing. We ended up with one data element only "Family planning
clients" and then added two categories "FP method" with all the
contraceptives as options, and another category "FP client type" with
new or continuing as options. This way it will be easy to get the total
number of family planning clients which is the major value to look at in
data analysis, and from there you can easily get the details on method
or how many new clients there are.

### Step-by-step approach to designing datasets { #step-by-step-approach-to-designing-datasets } 

1.  Identify the different tables (or sub datasets) in the paper form
    that share the same dimensions

2.  For each table identify the dimensions that describe the data fields

3.  Identify the key dimension, the one that makes most sense to look at
    in isolation (when the others are collapsed, summed up). This is
    your data element dimension, the starting point and core of your
    multidimensional model (sub dataset). The data element dimension can
    be a merger of two or more dimensions if that makes more sense for
    data analysis. The key is to identify which total that makes most
    sense to look at alone when the other dimensions are collapsed.

4.  For all other/additional dimensions identify their options, and come
    up with explanatory names for dimensions and their options.

5.  Each of these additional dimensions will be a data element category
    and their options will be category options.

6.  Combine all categories for each sub dataset into one category
    combination and assign this to all the data elements in your table
    (or sub dataset if you like).

7.  7\. When you are done with all the tables (sub datasets), create a
    new dataset and add all the data elements you have identified (in
    the whole paper form) to that dataset.

8.  8\. Your dataset will then consist of a set of data elements that
    are linked to one or more category combinations.


# Additional data dimensions { #additional_data_dimensions } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:additional_data_dimensions-->

## About additional data dimensions { #about-additional-data-dimensions } 

DHIS2 has the ability to add dimensions to data in addition to what was
described in the previous chapter. We will call these dimensions
"attribute categories" (ACs). The categories described in the previous
chapter we will call "disaggregation categories" (DCs) to differentiate
them from ACs.

ACs and DCs are quite similar—they work in much the same way, are
accessed through the same part of the maintenance interface, and exist
in the same part of the database. The main difference between them is
what they are connected to: a DC is attached to a data element. An AC,
however, is attached to a data set. This means values for all DC options
can be entered on the same data entry screen, whereas you must choose
the AC option before you begin to enter data.

In setting up a system, you could just use DCs and ignore ACs
altogether. However, ACs are a way to simplify data entry screens or
reduce the size of the cross-product of category option combos.

When you’re deciding which categories should be DCs and which should be
ACs, here’s a good rubric:

  - Use DCs when you want to use different combinations of categories on
    different data elements within a data set

  - Use DCs when you want to enter all the category option combinations
    on one data entry screen

  - Use ACs when you want to use the same combination of categories for
    all the data in a data set

  - Use ACs when you want to enter only one category option combination
    on one data entry screen

While we referred to DCs as part of the *what* dimension for simplicity
in the former chapter, it’s actually more complex. Either DCs or ACs can
answer any question about a data element, including *what* (of course),
*who*, *why*, *how*, or even a *where* or a *when* beyond the
organisation unit and period dimensions.

## Create or edit an attribute category and its options { #create-or-edit-an-attribute-category-and-its-options } 

For the process of creating an attribute category as well as options and
combinations, see the section of this manual named Manage categories.


# Relationship model { #relationship_model } 
<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:relationship_model-->

A relationship represents a link between two entities in the Tracker-model. A
relationship is considered data in DHIS2 and is based on a Relationship Type,
similar to how a Tracked Entity Instance is based on a Tracked Entity Type.

Relationships always include two entities, and these entities can include Tracked
Entity Instances, Enrollments and Events, and any combination of these. Note
that not all of these combinations are available in the current apps.

In addition, relationships can be defined as unidirectional or bidirectional.
The only functional difference is currently that these requires different levels
of access to create. Unidirectional relationships requires the user to have data
write access to the "from" entity and data read access for the "to" entity,
while bidirectional relationships require data write access for both sides.

## Relationship Type { #relationship_model_relationship_type } 
<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:relationship_model_relationship_type-->

A Relationship Type is the definition of the properties a relationship have.
Relationships always consists of two sides, referred to as "from" and "to", and
what entities can be contained for each side is determined by the Relationship
Type. The properties that determine what each can contain are called
constraints, fromConstraint and toConstraint respectively. These constraints are
significant when working with the data later, to understand what a relationship
can and cannot contain.

Each of the constraints defined in the Relationship Type consists of several
properties. The primary property is the relationship entity, which decides what
kind of entities the relationship can contain. The entities can be one of the
following for each constraint:

* Instancias de entidad Tracked
* Inscripción
* Evento

Depending on the kind of relationship entity you select, you can choose
additional limitations for each constraint. The following table explains the
different combinations you can configure:

|                     | Instancias de entidad Tracked | Inscripción | Evento    |
|---------------------|-------------------------|------------|----------|
| Tracked Entity Type | Requerido                | Opcional    | -        |
| Programa             | -                       | Requerido   | -        |
| Program Stage       | -                       | Requerido   | Opcional  |

These additional limitations, will require the entity to match the limitation
set before it can be created. For example, if your relationship is between a
mother and a child, both constraints would have their required Tracked Entity
Type set to Person and could optionally set the Enrollment to Maternal Health
Program and Child Program respectively. This way, only Tracked Entity Instances
who are of type Person and who is enrolled in the required program is allowed to
be included in these relationships.

In addition to the constrains a Relationship Type can have, each relationship
can be set to bidirectional, true or false. If the property is set to false, the
relationships are treated as unidirectional. As previously mentioned, the only
functional difference between these relationships are how strict the access is
when creating or updating them - bidirectional being the strictest. Relationships 
are also presented differently in the UI based on whether or not the relationship 
is bidirectional or unidirectional.

One important thing to note about bidirectional relationships, are that the
"from" and "to" sides are still significant in the database, meaning each entity
must match the constraint for that side. However, from a user perspective, which
side each entity is stored as is insignificant.


# DHIS2 Glossary { #dhis2_glossary } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:dhis2_glossary-->

  - Aggregation
    In the context of DHIS2, aggregation refers to how data elements are
    combined within a particular hierarchical relationship. As an
    example, all the health facilities in a particular district would
    contribute to the total value for the particular district in
    question. Different aggregation operators are supported within
    DHIS2, such as SUM, AVERAGE, and COUNT.

  - Analíticas
    Analytics refers to the process which processes and prepares data
    which has been entered into DHIS2 into a format which is more
    suitable for retrieving indicators and aggregated data. When data is
    entered into DHIS2, it is stored in a format which is optimized for
    writing the data. However, when data needs to be processed into
    indicators or aggregated (e.g from months to quarters), it is more
    efficient to transform and store this data in a different format
    which is optimized for read-only operations. The analytics system of
    DHIS2 is used extensively by the analytics apps (GIS, Pivot Table,
    Event reports, etc.).

    It is important to keep in mind that because the data which has been
    entered into DHIS2 must be processed into the analytics format, the
    data which appears in the analytics apps only represents the data
    which was present in the system the last time analytics was run. If
    data has been entered after that, analytics will need to be run
    again for this data to appear in the analytics apps.

  - Aggregate data
    In the context of DHIS2, aggregate data refers to either data
    elements or indicators that have been derived from other
    hierarchical data sources. For instance, aggregate facility data
    would result from the aggregate totals of all patients that have
    attended that facility for a particular service. Aggregate district
    data would result from the aggregate totals of all facilities
    contained with a particular district.

  - Application programming interface
    An application programming interface is a specification of how
    different software components should interact with each other. The
    DHIS2 API (or WebAPI) can be used to interface DHIS2 with other
    software, to build reports or custom data entry forms.

  - Approvals
    Approvals can be used to control the visibility and editibility of
    data. When data is submitted from the lowest reporting level, it can
    be approved by the next higher level. This approval has two effects:

    1.  Data is no longer able to be edited in the data entry screens at
        the lower level.

    2.  Depending on the system settings which have been enabled, the
        data will become visible at the approval level.

    As an example, data is entered at the facility level, and the
    submitted for approval. Once the data has been approved at the
    district level, the data will become locked in the data entry
    screens for the facility level. It will also become visible in the
    analytics apps to district users.

<!-- end list -->

  - Bi-monthly
    Refers to a two-month period, such as January 1st to February 28th.

<!-- end list -->

  - Categoría 
    Categories are groups of category options. The are used in
    combinations to disaggregate data elements. Categories are typically
    a single type of concept, such as "Age" or "Gender".

  - Category combinations
    Category combinations are used to disaggregate data elements. As an
    example, the data element "Number of confirmed cases of malaria"
    could be disaggregated subdivided into to categories: "Age" and
    "Gender". In turn each of these categories, would consist of several
    category options, such as "Male" and "Female" for the gender
    category. Category combinations may consist of one or several
    categories.

  - Category combination options
    Category combination options are dynamically composed of all of the
    different combinations of category options which compose a category
    combination. As an example, two categories "Gender" and "Age", might
    have options such as "Male"/"Female" and "\<5 years"/"\>5 years".
    The category combination options would then consist of:

    (Male/\<5 years)

    (Male/\>5 years)

    (Female/\<5 years)

    (Female/\>5 years)

  - Opción de categoría
    Category options are atomic elements that are grouped into
    categories.

  - Comma separated values
    Comma separated values are series of tabular data stored in a
    plain-text format. They are commonly used with DHIS2 to export and
    import data values.

<!-- end list -->

  - Data dictionary
    A collection of data elements and indicators, which can be exchanged
    with other DHIS2 systems. Typically used to define a set of data
    elements and indicators when setting up the DHIS2 system.

  - Data exchange format
    In the context of DHIS2, the "data exchange format" refers to a XML
    schema that enables the transportation of data and meta-data between
    disconnected DHIS2 instances, as well as between different
    applications that support the DXF schema.

  - Datamart
    A set of database tables in DHIS2 that contains processed data
    elements and indicator values that is generated based on aggregation
    rules and calculated data element and indicator formulae. Datamart
    tables are used for analysis and report production. Typically, users
    should not work directly with unaggregated data values, but rather
    with values that have resulted from a datamart export for analysis.

  - Elemento de datos
    A data element is the fundamental building block of DHIS2. It is an
    atomic unit of data with well-defined meaning. Essentially it is a
    data value that has been actually observed or recorded which is
    further characterized by a number of dimensions. As an example the
    data element "Number of fully immunized children" would refer to the
    number of children that received this particular service. Data
    elements are always linked to a period as well as an organizational
    unit. They optionally may be linked to other dimensions.

  - Grupo de elemento de datos
    Data element groups are used to categorize multiple data elements
    according to a common theme, such as "Immunization" or "ART".
    Typically, they are used during reporting and analysis to allow
    related data elements to be analysed together.

  - Data element group sets
    Data element groups are used to categorize multiple data element
    groups into a common theme.

  - Dimensión
    A dimension is used to categorize data elements during analysis.
    Dimensions provide a mechanism to group and filter data based on
    common characteristics. Typically, related data elements may be
    aggregated or filtered during analysis with the use of dimensions.
    Dimensions may be a member of a hierarchy. For instance the "Period"
    dimension may be broken down into "Day-\>Month-\>Quarter-\>Year".

  - DXF

<!-- end list -->

  - Health management information system
    Typically, an electronic database system that is used to record
    aggregated data on service delivery, disease incidence, human
    resource data and other information used to evaluate the performance
    of delivery of health services. Typically, an HMIS does not contain
    the highly detailed data of electronic medical record systems or
    individual patient data.

<!-- end list -->

  - Indicator
    The divisor of an indicator. Can be composed of multiple data
    elements with the use of an indicator formula.

    This is obviously a very generalized example. The numerator and
    indicator themselves can be composed of various data elements,
    factors, and the four basic operands (addition, multiplication,
    division and subtraction).

<!-- end list -->

  - Numerator
    The dividend of a indicator. Can be composed of multiple data
    elements and factors with the use of indicator formulas.

<!-- end list -->

  - Organisational unit
    An organisational unit is usually a geographical unit, which exists
    within a hierarchy. As an example, in the United States, "Georgia"
    would be considered an organisational unit with in the orgunit level
    of "State". Organizational units can also be used to specify an
    administrative unit, such as a ward within a hospital. The
    organisational unit dimension specifies essentially "where" a
    particular data value occurs.

  - Organisational unit level
    Refers to a level within an organizational hierarchy. Typically,
    countries are administered at different levels, such as 1) Country
    2) States 3) Counties 4) Health facilities. In the context of DHIS2,
    health facilities typically are the lowest orgunit level. Data is
    aggregated upwards from the lowest orgunit level to the highest.

<!-- end list -->

  - Período
    A period is a specific time interval which consists of a start date
    and end date. For instance "January 2011" would refer to the time
    interval of January 1st 2011-January 31st 2011.

<!-- end list -->

  - Unique identifier
    A unique identifier (UID) is a semi-random series of letters and
    numbers used by DHIS2 to identify specific resources. UIDs begin
    with a letter, and are followed by exactly 10 letters or digits.

# { #AlSaid2010 } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:AlSaid2010--> Said Salah Eldin Al Said The health
information system in Sudan The University of Oslo 2010
<http://urn.nb.no/URN:NBN:no-27062>

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:Berg2007--> Eivind Anders Berg The challenges of
implementing a health information system in Vietnam The University of
Oslo 2007 <http://urn.nb.no/URN:NBN:no-15021>

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:BraaHedeberg2002--> Jørn Braa Calle Hedberg The Struggle
for District-Based Health Information Systems in South Africa
Information Society 18 113-127 2002
<http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=aph&AN=6705438&site=ehost-live>

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:BraaNetworksAction2004--> Eric;Braa Jørn; Monteiro
Sundeep Sahay Networks of Action: Sustainable Health Information Systems
Across Developing Countries MIS Quarterly 28 3 2004
<http://aisel.aisnet.org/misq/vol28/iss3/3/>

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:Brucker2007--> Øyvind FBrucker Internationalization and
localization - A case study from HISP The University of Oslo 2007
<http://urn.nb.no/URN:NBN:no-15774>

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:Damitew2005--> Hirut Gebrekidan Damitew Netsanet
Haile Gebreyesus Sustainability and optimal use of Health Information
Systems The University of Oslo 2005 <http://urn.nb.no/URN:NBN:no-11506>

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:Jacucci06exploringtensions--> Ved Anfinsen Edoardo
Jacucci Cover Inger S EXPLORING TENSIONS IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
STANDARDIZATION Two Case Studies from Healthcare in Norway and South
Africa 2006 <http://folk.uio.no/edoardo/MatNatAvh_Jacucci_rettet.pdf>

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:Gjendem2008--> Anders Gjendem Recruitment, training,
communication and Open Source The University of Oslo 2008
<http://urn.nb.no/URN:NBN:no-19821>

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:Gjerull2006--> Nils Fredrik Gjerull Open Source Software
Development in Developing Countries The University of Oslo 2006
<http://urn.nb.no/URN:NBN:no-13117>

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:Heldre2006--> Thor Helge Heldre Study of a Health
Information System pilot project in Tanzania The University of Oslo 2006
<http://urn.nb.no/URN:NBN:no-12362>

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:Jacobsen2006--> Petter Jacobsen Design and development
of a global reporting solution for DHIS The University of Oslo 2006
<http://urn.nb.no/URN:NBN:no-12659>

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:BraaStandards2007--> Arthur Heywood Woishet Mohammed
Vincent ShawJørn Braa Ole Hanseth DEVELOPING HEALTH INFORMATION SYSTEMS
IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES: THE FLEXIBLE STANDARDS STRATEGY MIS Q 31 1 2007
<http://heim.ifi.uio.no/~vshaw/Files/Published%20Papers%20included%20in%20Kappa/4_Braa_Flexible%20standards.pdf>

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:BraaSahayPowerToUsers--> Sundeep Sahay Jørn Braa
Integrated Health Information Architecture - Power to the Users Matrix
Publishers 384 2012

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:Lewis2005--> John Lewis Design and development of
spatial GIS application for primary healthcare sector The University of
Oslo 2005 <http://urn.nb.no/URN:NBN:no-11504>

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:Mangset2005--> Lars Mangset DHIS-2 - A Globally
Distributed Development Process The University of Oslo 2005
<http://urn.nb.no/URN:NBN:no-10640>

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:Ngoma2007--> Caroline Ngoma Cultivation Strategies in
the Implementation of Health Management Information System in Zanzibar
The University of Oslo 2007 <http://urn.nb.no/URN:NBN:no-16911>

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:Nguyen2007--> Thanh Ngoc Nguyen OSS For Health Care in
Developing Countries The University of Oslo 2007
<http://urn.nb.no/URN:NBN:no-17859>

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:Saeb2009--> E.K. Golly-Kobrissa R.T. Titlestad O. Braa
J.Saeb J. Kossi Integrating health information systems in Sierra Leone
379 - 391 2009

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:ShawComplexityInspried2009--> Vincent Shaw A complexity
inspired approach to co-evolutionary hospital management information
systems development 2009
<http://folk.uio.no/vshaw/Files/VShaw%20Kappa%20Final%20Version/2_V_Shaw%20Intro%20Chapter_no%20annex.pdf>

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:Staring_Titlestad_2008--> Knut Staring O H Titlestad
Development as a Free Software: Extending Commons Based Peer Production
to the South ICIS 2008 Proceedings 50 2008
<http://aisel.aisnet.org/icis2008/50>

> This paper examines the concept of commons-based peer production
> (CBPP) in the context of public health information systems in the
> South. Based on an analysis of the findings from a global network of
> software development and implementation, an approach to preserve the
> importance of local user participation in distributed development is
> presented. Through practical examples, we discuss the applicability of
> the CBPP model for software production aimed at improving the public
> health sector in the South, and propose the concept of a snowflake
> topology.

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:Store2007--> Margrethe Store Explore the challenges of
providing documentation in open source projects The University of Oslo
2007 <http://urn.nb.no/URN:NBN:no-15782>

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:Storset2010--> Leif Arne Storset Integration of Health
Management Information Systems The University of Oslo 2010
<http://urn.nb.no/URN:NBN:no-25666>

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:ShawScaling2007--> Jorn Braa Vincent Shaw Shegaw Anagaw
Mengiste Scaling of Health Information Systems in Nigeria and Ethiopia-
Considering the Options 2007
<http://heim.ifi.uio.no/~vshaw/Files/Published%20Papers%20included%20in%20Kappa/6_Shaw_IFP9.4%20Scaling%20of%20HIS_Considering%20the%20Options.pdf>

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:Vo2009--> Kim Anh ThiVo Challenges of Health
Information Systems Programs in Developing Countries: SUCCESS and
FAILURE The University of Oslo 2009 <http://urn.nb.no/URN:NBN:no-23652>

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:Overland2010--> Jan HenrikØverland An Open Source
Approach to Improving GIS Implementations in Developing Countries The
University of Oslo 2010 <http://urn.nb.no/URN:NBN:no-24751>

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:Overland2006--> Lars HelgeØverland Global Software
Development and Local Capacity Building University of Oslo 2006
<http://urn.nb.no/URN:NBN:no-13609>


# About demo server, live package and database design { #moare_about_dhis2_server_database } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:moare_about_dhis2_server_database-->

## Using the DHIS2 demo server { #using-the-dhis2-demo-server } 

The DHIS2 team maintains a demonstration server at
<https://play.dhis2.org/demo>. This is by far the easiest way to try out
DHIS2. Simply open the link in your web browser and login with username
= admin and password = district.

> **Note**
>
> All changes on this server are deleted each night, so do not save any
> important work on this server. It is strictly for demonstration
> purposes on only\!

## Using the DHIS2 live package { #mod2_1 } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:mod2_1-->

### Starting the DHIS2 Live package { #starting-the-dhis2-live-package } 

The DHIS2 Live package is the easiest way to get started with DHIS2 on
your local computer. DHIS2 Live is appropriate for a stand-alone
installation and demos. Simply download the application from
[here](http://www.dhis2.org/downloads). Once the file is downloaded, you
can simply double-click the downloaded file, and get started using
DHIS2.

#### Prerequisites for DHIS2 Live { #prerequisites-for-dhis2-live } 

You must be sure that you have a current version of the Java Runtime
installed on your machine. Depending on your operating system, there are
different ways of installing Java. The reader is referred to this
[website](http://java.sun.com/javase/downloads/index.jsp) for detailed
information on getting Java installed.

#### Starting up with a blank database { #starting-up-with-a-blank-database } 

The live package comes with a demo database just like what you see on
the [online demo](http://apps.dhis2.org/demo/) (which is based on the
national Sierra Leone HMIS), and if you want to start with a blank
system/database and build up your own system then you need to do the
following:

1\) Stop DHIS2 live if it is already running. Right click on the tray
icon and select Exit. The tray icon is the green symbol on the bottom
right of your screen (on Windows) which should say' DHIS2 Server
running' when you hover your mouse pointer over the icon.

2\) Open the folder where the DHIS2 live package is installed and locate
the folder called "conf".

3\) In conf/ open the file called 'hibernate.properties' in a text
editor (notepad or similar) and do the following modification: locate
the string 'jdbc:h2:./database/dhis2' and replace the 'dhis2' part with
any name that you want to give to your database (e.g. dhis2\_test).

4\) Save and close the hibernate.properties file.

5\) Start DHIS2 Live by double-clicking on the file dhis2-live.exe in
the DHIS2 Live installation folder or by using a desktop shortcut or
menu link that you might have set up.

6\) Wait for the browser window to open and the login screen to show,
and then log in with username: admin and password: district

7\) Now you will see a completely empty DHIS2 system and you should
start by adding your users, organisational hierarchy, data elements, and
datasets etc. Please refer to the other sections of the user manual for
instructions on how to do this.

### Downloading and installing the server version { #downloading-and-installing-the-server-version } 

The latest stable server version can be downloaded from this
[website](http://stable.dhis2.org/). For detailed information on how to
install it please refer to the installation chapter in the
implementation manual.

## Logging on to DHIS2 { #mod2_2 } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:mod2_2-->

Regardless of whether you have installed the server version of the
desktop Live version, you will use a web-browser to log on to the
application. DHIS2 should be compatible with most modern web-browsers,
although you will need to ensure that Java Script is enabled.

To log on to the application just enter <http://localhost:8080/dhis> if
you are using the DHIS2 live package, or replace `localhost` with the
name or IP address of the server where the server version is installed.

Once you have started DHIS2, either on-line or off-line, the displayed
screen will prompt you to enter your registered user-name and password.
After entering the required information click on log-in button to log
into the application. The default user name and password are 'admin' and
'district'. They should be changed immediately upon logging on the first
time.

![](resources/images/getting_started/login.png)

You can select the language which you wish to display DHIS2 in from the
"Change language" dialog box at the bottom of the screen. Not all
languages may be available.

Should you have forgotten your password, you can click on the "Forgot
password?" link. You must have informed DHIS2 of your email address and
the server must be properly configured to send emails.

If you want to create your own account (and the server administrator
allows this), simply click "Create an account" and follow the directions
provided.

Once you have logged into DHIS2, refer to the specific sections in this
manual for the different functionality which is available.

## Logging out of DHIS2 { #mod2_4 } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:mod2_4-->

Just click on the Profile and the click "Log out" the top-right corner
of the DHIS2 menu.

## Quick intro to designing a DHIS2 database { #database_design } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:database_design-->

DHIS2 provides a powerful set of tools for data collection, validation,
reporting and analysis, but the contents of the database, e.g. what to
collect, who should collect it and on what format will depend on the
context of use. However, in order to do anything with DHIS2, you must
first create meta-data. Meta-data, or data about the data, describes
what should be collected (data elements and categories), where it should
be collected (organisation units) and how frequently it should be
collected (periods). This meta-data needs to be created in the DHIS2
database before it can be used. This can be done through the user
interface and requires no programming or in-depth technical skills of
the software, but does require a good understanding of the processes
which you are trying to collect data form.

This section will provide a very quick and brief introduction to DHIS2
database design and mainly explain the various steps needed to prepare a
new DHIS2 system for use. How to do each step is explained in other
chapters, and best practices on design choices will be explained in the
implementers manual. Here are the steps to follow:

1\. Set up an organisational hierarchy

2\. Define data elements

3\. Define data sets and data entry forms

4\. Define validation rules

5\. Define indicators

6\. Define report tables and design reports

7\. Set up the GIS module

8\. Design charts and customise the dashboard

### The organisational hierarchy { #the-organisational-hierarchy } 

The organisational hierarchy defines the organisation using the DHIS2,
the health facilities, administrative areas and other geographical areas
used in data collection and data analysis. This dimension to the data is
defined as a hierarchy with one root unit (e.g. Ministry of Health) and
any number of levels and nodes below. Each node in this hierarchy is
called an organisational unit in DHIS2.

The design of this hierarchy will determine the geographical units of
analysis available to the users as data is collected and aggregated in
this structure. There can only be one organisational hierarchy at the
same time so its structure needs careful consideration. Additional
hierarchies (e.g. parallel administrative groupings such as "Facility
ownership") can be modelled using organisational groups and group sets,
however the organisational hierarchy is the main vehicle for data
aggregation on the geographical dimension. Typically national
organisational hierarchies in public health have 4-6 levels, but any
number of levels is supported. The hierarchy is built up of parent-child
relations, e.g. a Country or MoH unit (the root) might have e.g. 8
parent units (provinces), and each province again ( at level 2) might
have 10-15 districts as their children. Normally the health facilities
will be located at the lowest level, but they can also be located at
higher levels, e.g. national or provincial hospitals, so skewed
organisational trees are supported (e.g. a leaf node can be positioned
at level 2 while most other leaf nodes are at level 5).

Typically there is a geographical hierarchy defined by the health
system. e.g. where the administrative offices are located (e.g. MoH,
province, district), but often there are other administrative boundaries
in the country that might or might not be added, depending on how its
boundaries will improve data analysis. When designing the hierarchy the
number of children for any organisational unit may indicate the
usefulness of the structure, e.g. having one or more 1-1 relationships
between two levels is not very useful as the values will be the same for
the child and the parent level. On the other extreme a very high number
of children in the middle of the hierarchy (e.g. 50 districts in a
province) might call for an extra level to be added in between to
increase the usefulness of data analysis. The lowest level, the health
facilities will often have a large number of children (10-60), but for
other levels higher up in the hierarchy approx. 5-20 children is
recommended. Too few or too many children might indicate that a level
should be removed or added.

Note that it is quite easy to make changes to the upper levels of the
hierarchy at a later stage, the only problem is changing organisational
units that collect data (the leaf nodes), e.g. splitting or merging
health facilities. Aggregation up the hierarchy is done based on the
current hierarchy at any time and will always reflect the most recent
changes to the organisational structure. Refer to the chapter on
Organisation Units to learn how to create organisational units and to
build up the hierarchy.

### Data Elements { #data-elements } 

The Data Element is perhaps the most important building block of a DHIS2
database. It represents the "WHAT" dimension, it explains what is being
collected or analysed. In some contexts this is referred to an
indicator, but in DHIS2 we call this unit of collection and analysis a
*data element*. The data element often represents a count of something,
and its name describes what is being counted, e.g. "BCG doses given" or
"Malaria cases". When data is collected, validated, analysed, reported
or presented it is the data elements or expressions built upon data
elements that describes the WHAT of the data. As such the data elements
become important for all aspects of the system and they decide not only
how data is collected, but more importantly how the data values are
represented in the database, which again decides how data can be
analysed and presented.

It is possible to add more details to this "WHAT" dimension through the
disaggregation dimension called data element categories. Some common
categories are Age and Gender, but any category can be added by the user
and linked to specific data elements. The combination of a data
element's name and its assigned category defines the smallest unit of
collection and analysis available in the system, and hence describes the
raw data in the database. Aggregations can be done when zooming out of
this dimension, but no further drill-down is possible, so designing data
elements and categories define the detail of the analysis available to
the system (on the WHAT dimension). Changes to data elements and
categories at a later stage in the process might be complicated as these
will change the meaning of the data values already captured in the
database (if any). So this step is one of the more decisive and careful
steps in the database design process.

One best practice when designing data elements is to think of data
elements as a unit of data analysis and not just as a field in the data
collection form. Each data element lives on its own in the database,
completely detached from the collection form, and reports and other
outputs are based on data elements and expressions/formulas composed of
data elements and not the data collection forms. So the data analysis
needs should drive the process, and not the look an feel of the data
collection forms. A simple rule of thumb is that the name of the data
element must be able to stand on its own and describe the data value
also outside the context of its collection form. E.g. a data element
name like "Total referrals" makes sense when looking at it in either the
"RCH" form or the "OPD" form, but on its own it does not uniquely
describe the phenomena (who are being referred?), and should in stead be
called "Total referrals from Maternity" or "Total referrals from OPD".
Two different data elements with different meanings, although the field
on the paper form might only say "Total referrals" since the user of the
form will always know where these referrals come from. In a database or
a repository of data elements this context is no longer valid and
therefore the names of the data elements become so important in
describing the data.

Common properties of data elements can be modelled through what is
called data element groups. The groups are completely flexible in the
sense that they are defined by the user, both their names and their
memberships. Groups are useful both for browsing and presenting related
data, but can also be used to aggregate data elements together. Groups
are loosely coupled to data elements and not tied directly to the data
values which means they can be modified and added at any point in time
without interfering with the raw data.

### Datasets and data entry forms { #datasets-and-data-entry-forms } 

All data entry in DHIS2 is organised through the use of Datasets. A
Dataset is a collection of data elements grouped together for data
collection, and in the case of distributed installs they also define
chunks of data for export and import between instances of DHIS2 (e.g.
from a district office local installation to a national server).
Datasets are not linked directly to the data values, only through their
data elements and frequencies, and as such a dataset can be modified,
deleted or added at any point in time without affecting the raw data
already captured in the system, but such changes will of course affect
how new data will be collected.

A dataset has a period type which controls the data collection
frequency, which can be daily, weekly, monthly, quarterly, six-monthly,
or yearly. Both which data elements to include in the dataset and the
period type is defined by the user, together with a name, short name,
and code.

In order to use a dataset to collect data for a specific orgunit you
must assign the orgunit to the dataset, and this mechanism controls
which orgunits that can use which datasets, and at the same time defines
the target values for data completeness (e.g. how many health facilities
in a district expected to submit RCH data every month).

A data element can belong to multiple datasets, but this requires
careful thinking as it may lead to overlapping and inconstant data being
collected if e.g. the datasets are given different frequencies and are
used by the same orgunits.

#### Data entry forms { #data-entry-forms } 

Once you have assigned a dataset to an orgunit that dataset will be made
available in Data Entry (under Services) for the orgunits you have
assigned it to and for the valid periods according to the dataset's
period type. A default data entry form will then be shown, which is
simply a list of the data elements belonging to the dataset together
with a column for inputting the values. If your dataset contains data
elements with categories such as age groups or gender, then additional
columns will be automatically generated in the default form based on the
categories. In addition to the default list-based data entry form there
are two more alternatives, the section-based form and the custom form.

##### Section forms { #section-forms } 

Section forms allow for a bit more flexibility when it comes to using
tabular forms and are quick and simple to design. Often your data entry
form will need multiple tables with subheadings, and sometimes you need
to disable (grey out) a few fields in the table (e.g. some categories do
not apply to all data elements), both of these functions are supported
in section forms. After defining a dataset you can define it's sections
with subsets of data elements, a heading and possible grey fields i the
section's table. The order of sections in a dataset can also be defined.
In Data Entry you can now start using the Section form (should appear
automatically when sections are available for the selected dataset). You
can switch between default and section forms in the top right corner of
the data entry screen. Most tabular data entry forms should be possible
to do with sections forms, and the more you can utilise the section
forms (or default forms) the easier it is for you. If these two types of
forms are not meeting your requirements then the third option is the
completely flexible, although more time-consuming, custom data entry
forms.

##### Custom Forms { #custom-forms } 

When the form you want to design is too complicated for the default or
section forms then your last option is to use a custom form. This takes
more time, but gives you full flexibility in term of the design. In
DHIS2 there is a built in HTML editor (FcK Editor) for the form designer
and you can either design the form in the UI or paste in your HTML
directly using the Source window in the editor. In the custom form you
can insert static text or data fields (linked to data elements +
category) in any position on the form and you have complete freedom to
design the layout of the form. Once a custom form has been added to a
dataset it will be available in data entry and used automatically. You
can switch back to default and section (if exists) forms in the top
right corner of the data entry screen.

### Validation rules { #validation-rules } 

Once you have set up the data entry part of the system and started to
collect data then there is time to define data quality checks that help
to improve the quality of the data being collected. You can add as many
validation rules as you like and these are composed of left and right
side expressions that again are composed of data elements, with an
operator between the two sides. Typical rules are comparing subtotals to
totals of something. E.g. if you have two data elements "HIV tests
taken" and "HIV test result positive" then you know that in the same
form (for the same period and organisational unit) the total number of
tests must always be equal or higher than the number of positive tests.
These rules should be absolute rules meaning that they are
mathematically correct and not just assumptions or "most of the time
correct". The rules can be run in data entry, after filling each form,
or as a more batch like process on multiple forms at the same time, e.g.
for all facilities for the previous reporting month. The results of the
tests will list all violations and the detailed values for each side of
the expression where the violation occurred to make it easy to go back
to data entry and correct the values.

### Indicators { #indicators } 

Indicators represent perhaps the most powerful data analysis feature of
the DHIS2. While data elements represent the raw data (counts) being
collected the indicators represent formulas providing coverage rates,
incidence rates, ratios and other formula-based units of analysis. An
indicator is made up of a factor (e.g. 1, 100, 100, 100 000), a
numerator and a denominator, the two latter are both expressions based
on one or more data elements. E.g. the indicator "BCG coverage \<1 year"
is defined a formula with a factor 100, a numerator ("BCG doses given to
children under 1 year") and a denominator ("Target population under 1
year"). The indicator "DPT1 to DPT3 drop out rate" is a formula of 100 %
x ("DPT1 doses given"- "DPT3 doses given") / ("DPT1 doses given").

Most report modules in DHIS2 support both data elements and indicators
and you can also combine these in custom reports, but the important
difference and strength of indicators versus raw data (data element's
data values) is the ability to compare data across different
geographical areas (e.g. highly populated vs rural areas) as the target
population can be used in the denominator.

Indicators can be added, modified and deleted at any point in time
without interfering with the data values in the database.

### Report tables and reports { #report-tables-and-reports } 

Standard reports in DHIS2 are a very flexible way of presenting the data
that has been collected. Data can be aggregated by any organisational
unit or orgunit level, by data element, by indicators, as well as over
time (e.g. monthly, quarterly, yearly). The report tables are custom
data sources for the standard reports and can be flexibly defined in the
user interface and later accessed in external report designers such as
iReport or through custom HTML reports. These report designs can then be
set up as easily accessible one-click reports with parameters so that
the users can run the same reports e.g. every month when new data is
entered, and also be relevant to users at all levels as the
organisational unit can be selected at the time of running the report.

### GIS { #gis } 

In the integrated GIS module you can easily display your data on maps,
both on polygons (areas) and as points (health facilities), and either
as data elements or indicators. By providing the coordinates of your
organisational units to the system you can quickly get up to speed with
this module. See the GIS section for details on how to get started.

### Charts and dashboard { #charts-and-dashboard } 

On of the easiest way to display your indicator data is through charts.
An easy to use chart dialogue will guide you through the creation of
various types of charts with data on indicators, organisational units
and periods of your choice. These charts can easily be added to one of
the four chart sections on your dashboard and there be made easily
available right after log in. Make sure to set the dashboard module as
the start module in user settings.


# DHIS2 Tutorials { #dhis2_tutorials } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:dhis2_tutorials-->

## Create Scorecards using the Pivot Table app { #create-scorecards-pivot-table } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:create-scorecards-pivot-table-->

***Scorecards definition:** In public health settings such as Ministries
of Health, scorecards offer a useful and standardized method for
combining related indicators into one table. A scorecard gives an
overall view of the performance of a health program such as a
vaccination program, highlighting successes, weaknesses, and areas for
improvement Here's what a typical scorecard looks like:*

![](resources/images/tutorials/scorecards_pivot_result.png)

This tutorial explains how to create a scorecard in the DHIS2 Pivot
Table app. There are several advantages to using the Pivot Table to
create a scorecard, such as:

  - You can save the scorecard on the dashboard and use it offline.

  - You can share the scorecard with other DHIS2 users.

Let's get started\!

### Create a legend for your scorecard { #create-a-legend-for-your-scorecard } 

First, we’ll create a 3-color “traffic light” legend for the scorecard.
With three basic colors, the scorecard is easy to scan and easy to
understand.

1.  Open the **Maintenance** app. Click the menu in the top right corner
    and select Maintenance from the list of apps. You can also type the
    first letters of the word maintenance in the search field to find
    the app.

    ![](resources/images/tutorials/scorecards_maintenance_app.png)

2.  In the Maintenance app, scroll to the bottom of the page right down
    to the **Other** section.

3.  Go to **Legend** and click the **+**.

    ![](resources/images/tutorials/scorecards_maintenance_legend.png)

4.  In the **Legend Management** page, scroll to the bottom of the page
    and create a new legend by clicking the blue + button.

    ![](resources/images/tutorials/scorecards_maintenance_addbtn.png)

5.  Enter a name for the legend such as “Traffic light”, a start value
    and an end value in the fields. The values you enter here depend on
    the performance ratings you wish to set for the scorecard.

6.  Change **Number of legend items** to 3 to display three colors in
    the scorecard. To change the legend item colors, click the blue +
    button and then edit the
    colors.

    ![](resources/images/tutorials/scorecards_maintenance_legend_color.png)

### Create a scorecard in the Pivot Table app { #create-a-scorecard-in-the-pivot-table-app } 

1.  Open the **Pivot Table** app from the top right menu of the
    dashboard. You can also enter the first letters of Pivot Table in
    the search field.

2.  Go to **Data** in the pane on the left side and select
    **Indicators** in the list.

3.  Select an **Indicator group** such as “ANC” in the second list.

4.  Using the arrows, select the type of indicators you want to see in
    your scorecard.

    ![](resources/images/tutorials/scorecards_pivot_indicators.png)

5.  Click **Update**. This button is in the menu at the top of the
    workspace

6.  Go to **Periods** and select a period for which you want to display
    data. In this “traffic light” example, we’ll use the relative period
    section. In **Quarters**, select **This quarter**and **Last
    quarter**. Clear any other checkboxes and click **Update**.

    ![](resources/images/tutorials/scorecards_pivot_period.png)

7.  Go to **Organisation Units** in the same left side pane, and click
    the arrow next to the gear button.

8.  Select **Select levels**.

    ![](resources/images/tutorials/scorecards_pivot_orgunit_level.png)

9.  Select **District** from the list (next to the gear button). Click
    **Update**.

    ![](resources/images/tutorials/scorecards_pivot_orgunit_level2.png)

As you can see, the scorecard is starting to take shape in the
workspace. Now it’s time to fine-tune the look and feel.

### Organise the layout and display of your scorecard { #organise-the-layout-and-display-of-your-scorecard } 

1.  In the workspace, click **Layout**.

    ![](resources/images/tutorials/scorecards_pivot_layout.png)

2.  In **Table layout**, drag **Organisation units** down to the **Row
    dimensions** section.

3.  Drag **Data** to the **Column dimensions** section.

4.  In the **Column dimensions** pane, drag **Periods** below **Data**,
    and click **Update**.

5.  In the workspace, click **Options**.

    ![](resources/images/tutorials/scorecards_pivot_options.png)

6.  Go to **Data** and clear all the checkboxes.

7.  Go to **Style** \> **Legend set** and from the list, select the
    legend you created in the Maintenance app. In this example, we
    called it Traffic light.

8.  Go to **Style** \> **Legend display style** and select **Background
    color**.

9.  Click **Actualizar**.

The Scorecard is ready\!


![](resources/images/tutorials/scorecards_pivot_result.png)

### Save and share your scorecard { #save-and-share-your-scorecard } 

1.  In the workspace, go to the **Favorites** menu.

2.  Click **Save as**. Enter a name for your Scorecard.

3.  To share your Scorecard, select **Favorites**.

4.  Enter the name of a user group name, and click **Save**. Your
    scorecard can be viewed by people that you share a dashboard with.

## Working with TextPattern { #working-with-textpattern } 

<!--DHIS2-SECTION-ID:working-with-textpattern-->

TextPattern was introduced in DHIS2 version 2.29, as a way of defining a
pattern that includes variables, generated values and raw text, which
then could be generated into a text value. The current use-case for
TextPattern is automatically generated attributes for tracked entities,
where you want to generate for example unique ids based on a specific
pattern.

This guide will cover both basic and advanced topics for working with
TextPattern, but is mainly focused on how you can define TextPatterns
and which limitations and caveats exists.

### TextPattern syntax { #textpattern-syntax } 

A TextPattern is a sequence of *segments*, joined together by the "+"
character. A segment has a specific notation and in most cases a
parameter *format*, which allows for further manipulation of the value.

<table>
<caption>TextPattern segments</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 36%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 30%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Segment notation</th>
<th>Description</th>
<th>Paramenter (format)</th>
<th>Example (segment → input value → result)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>&quot;Plain text&quot;</td>
<td>The plain text segment will remain unchanged in all generated values. This special segment is defined by wrapping text between two double quotes. If your pattern should include separation symbols like a dash, you should use this &quot;-&quot;.
<p>The plain text segment also allows for placeholder text. That means you can specify that parts of the plain text segment should be any of a set of characters. Currently there are 4 supported special characters you can use:</p>
<ul>
<li><p>\d (0-9)</p></li>
<li><p>\x (a-z)</p></li>
<li><p>\X (A-Z)</p></li>
<li><p>\w (a-zA-Z0-9)</p></li>
</ul></td>
<td>None</td>
<td>&quot;Hello world&quot; → None → Hello world
<p>&quot;Hello \x\x\x&quot; → &quot;Hello you&quot; → Hello you</p>
<p>&quot;\d\d\d&quot; → &quot;123&quot; → 123</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>CURRENT_DATE(format)</td>
<td>Current date segment will be generated by the server at the time of generation. This is useful if you want your patterns to have a time-constraint that is disconnected from the context. You should not use this if you need to control which date is injected into the pattern.</td>
<td>Date format</td>
<td>CURRENT_DATE(yyyy) → 01-01-2018 → 2018</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>ORG_UNIT_CODE(format)</td>
<td>This segment represents the organisation unit code associated with the generation.</td>
<td>Text format</td>
<td>ORG_UNIT_CODE(...) → OSLO → OSL</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>RANDOM(format)</td>
<td>Random segments will be replaced by a value randomly generated by the server based on the format. Generated segments, like Random, bases its uniqueness on the rest of the pattern. That means a random value can appear twice, as long as the rest of the pattern is different, which means the generated text as a whole will be unique.</td>
<td>Generation format</td>
<td>RANDOM(X####) → None → A1234</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>SEQUENTIAL(format)</td>
<td>Sequential segments will be replaced by a number, based on a counting value on the server. Sequential segments will start at the value 1, and for each generated value count up until no more values are available, based on the format. Like Random segments, uniqueness is based on the rest of the pattern, so each possible version of the pattern will have it's own sequential counter starting from 1.</td>
<td>Generation format</td>
<td>&quot;A&quot;+SEQUENTIAL(###) → None → A001
<p>&quot;A&quot;-SEQUENTIAL(###) → None → A002</p>
<p>&quot;B&quot;-SEQUENTIAL(###) → None → B001</p>
<p>&quot;B&quot;-SEQUENTIAL(###) → None → B002</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Most segments has a parameter *format*, except for the plain text
segment. The following table lists the available formats, how they are
used and example notations using them.

<table>
<caption>Parameter formats</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 13%" />
<col style="width: 52%" />
<col style="width: 34%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Format</th>
<th>Description</th>
<th>Example</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Date format</td>
<td>This format is based directly on the java SimpleDateFormat, which means any pattern valid for SimpleDateFormat, will be valid as a date format in TextPattern</td>
<td>CURRENT_DATE(dd-MM-yyyy) → 31-12-2018
<p>CURRENT_DATE(MM-yyyy) → 12-2018</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Text format</td>
<td>The text format allows for some basic text manipulation. Leaving the format empty will return the value unmodified, but using "^", "." and "&#36;", you can modify the value before it is returned. Each "." represents a character, while "^" represents the start of the text and "&#36;" represents the end. When using formats, the input value must be at least the same length as the format.</td>
<td>
<p>ORG_UNIT_CODE(....) → OSLO</p>
<p>ORG_UNIT_CODE(..) → OS</p>
<p>ORG_UNIT_CODE(..&#36;) → LO</p>
<p>ORG_UNIT_CODE(^...&#36;) → OSLO</p>
<p>^....&#36; will require the input value to be exactly 4 characters.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Generation format</td>
<td>The generation format accepts a combination of one or more of he following characters: &quot;#&quot;, &quot;X&quot;, &quot;x&quot; and &quot;*&quot;. They respectively represent a number(0-9), an uppercase letter (A-Z), a lowercase letter(a-z) or any of the above(0-9,a-z,A-Z). The SEQUENTIAL segment only accepts &quot;#&quot;, since it will only generate numbers. The number of characters in the format decides the size of the value generated. Using just one &quot;#&quot; will in other words only allow for 10 values (0-9), while &quot;###&quot; will allow for 1000 values (000-999). SEQUENTIAL generated values have leading zeroes, so the length of the generated value will always match the format length.</td>
<td>RANDOM(X###) → A123
<p>RANDOM(****) → 1AbC</p>
<p>SEQUENTIAL(###) → 001</p>
<p>SEQUENTIAL(######) → 000001</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

A few important things to note regarding the formats:

  - Date format is very versatile, but be aware of which date or time
    components you are using. Using components smaller than a day (For
    example hours or seconds) is not recommended, even though available.

  - Text format allows for marking both the start and end of the input
    value, but "^..." and "..." will in reality give exactly the same
    results. The only time you would want to use "^" is when you want to
    enforce the length of the input value. For example, "^....$" will
    accept OSLO, since its 4 characters between the start and end, but
    PARIS will be rejected, since it has 5 characters.

  - When text format is used for unique values, like organisation unit
    code, make sure that the format does not break the uniqueness.
    (Example: ORG\_UNIT\_CODE(..) for "PARIS" and "PANAMA CITY" would
    both return PA, which means these two organisation units would in
    reality share generated values)

  - Generation format is the primary way to understanding the capacity
    of your pattern. Make sure the format is long enough to cover more
    values than you need.

To finish off the syntax section of the tutorial, here is a couple of
example
    TextPattern:

    ORG_UNIT_CODE(...) + "-" + CURRENT_DATE(yyyyww) + "-" + SEQUENTIAL(#####)

This pattern will have 99999 possible values (based on SEQUENTIAL. 00000
is never used since we start at 1). In addition, the remaining pattern
will change for each different organisation unit generating values
(ORG\_UNIT\_CODE) and for each week (CURRENT\_DATE(yyyyww) represents
year and week). That effectively means every new week, each organisation
unit will have 99999 new values they can use.

    "ABC_" + RANDOM(****)

The plain text segment of this pattern, will make no difference in the
total capacity of the pattern, however the generated segment (RANDOM)
will allow for 14776336 possible values. The reason for this is that \*
can be any one character of the 62 characters available (0-9, a-z, A-Z).
You can read more about understanding pattern capacity further down in
the tutorial.

### Designing TextPattern for generating ids { #designing-textpattern-for-generating-ids } 

One use-case for TextPattern is to generate unique ids. In this section
we will present guidelines and common issues related to designing
TextPatterns used for ids.

An id should never contain sensitive information, or information that in
combination can identify an individual. TextPattern does not currently
support segments that uses these kind of values, but might do so in the
future.

The following list highlights some of the TextPattern specific
restrictions you need to consider when designing a TextPattern for ids:

  - Make sure the capacity (number of possible values) of the
    TextPattern covers your use-case. It's better to have more values
    than needed than less. Tracked entity attributes using TextPattern
    will require that a single generated segment is present in the
    TextPattern.

  - A TextPattern is unique in the entire system, but only for the
    object using it. In other words, if you have a single tracked entity
    attribute with TextPattern, used by multiple Tracked entities (Not
    to be mistaken for tracked entity instances), all values generated
    will be shared between all traced entities using the attribute. This
    also means that if you have two tracked entity attributes with the
    same TextPattern syntax, each attribute will be able to generate the
    same value as the other, since uniqueness is based on the attribute.

<!-- end list -->

  - SEQUENTIAL segments are in the implementation numbers starting from
    1, increasing by 1 for each value, sequentially until no more values
    are available. However, in reality you will most likely end up with
    gaps when users generate and reserve values that is never used, or
    if a user sends in a value where the SEQUENTIAL segment has a higher
    value than recorded on the server.

  - The current implementation relies on the user-client to send in the
    values contained in the TextPattern when storing a new value. That
    means generating a correct id is depending on the user, and
    user-client, to provide the correct data.

### Understanding TextPattern capacity { #understanding-textpattern-capacity } 

The most important thing to keep in mind when designing a TextPattern,
is the capacity - that means the total number of potential values a
TextPattern can yield.

With the current implementation of TextPattern, there are three main
factors that decides the capacity:

1.  Capacity of the generated segment in the TextPattern

2.  The presence of a CURRENT\_DATE segment

3.  The presence of a ORG\_UNIT\_CODE segment

The presence of a date segment (like CURRENT\_DATE) will effectively
reset the capacity each time the segment changes. Depending on the date
format, it can change anywhere to yearly to daily. **Important: If your
date format don't contain a year, the pattern will resolve to the same
value every year.** That means values will already be used. For example,
if your TextPattern looks like this:

    CURRENT_DATE(ww) + "-" + RANDOM(#)

This pattern will give you up to 10 unique values for each week, but
after 1 year, CURRENT\_DATE(ww) will be the same as last year, and you
will have no new values available. If you use "yyyy-ww" instead, it will
be unique for every year, every week.

Organisation unit codes will make your values unique for each different
organisation unit, which means if you have a text pattern like this:

    ORG_UNIT_CODE() + "-" + RANDOM(#)

This pattern will give you 10 unique values for each different
organisation unit.

#### Calculating capacity for generated segments { #calculating-capacity-for-generated-segments } 

Understanding how to calculate the capacity of a TextPattern is critical
when designing TextPatterns. The generated segments will be the main
component of any TextPattern in terms of capacity, then increased based
on the presence of ORG\_UNIT\_CODE or CURRENT\_DATE.

Let's start with SEQUENTIAL segments. Each "\#" in the format represents
a number between 0 and 9. To calculate the total capacity, you multiply
the number of possible values for each "\#". Since it's always 10 (0-9)
the maths is quite straight forward:

    SEQUENTIAL(#) = 10 = 10
    SEQUENTIAL(###) = 10 * 10 * 10 = 1000
    SEQUENTIAL(#####) = 10 * 10 * 10 * 10 * 10 = 100000

Since SEQUENTIAL counters on the server start at 1 and not 0, the actual
capacity is 999, but that's insignificant in most cases.

As soon as we involve RANDOM, the calculation becomes a bit more
complicated. Similar to SEQUENTIAL, a "\#" has 10 possible values, in
addition we have "X" and "x" with 26 possible values each, as well as
"\*" which can be any of the previous, which means 62 (10+26+26)
possible values.

To calculate the capacity, you need to take each character in your
format and replace with the number of possible values, then multiply
them all together like we did for SEQUENTIAL:

    RANDOM(#) = 10 = 10
    RANDOM(X) = 26 = 26
    RANDOM(*) = 62 = 62

    RANDOM(X##) = 26 * 10 * 10 = 2600
    RANDOM(XXxx) = 26 * 26 * 26 * 26 = 456976

    RANDOM(***) = 62 * 62 * 62 = 238328

As you can see, the maths gets a bit more complicated when, but by
following this recipe you can see the number of potential values.

### Random segments and why you should avoid it { #random-segments-and-why-you-should-avoid-it } 

There is a hidden cost of using the random segment in TextPattern in the
long run, but that does not mean you should never use it. This section
will highlight the problems of using the random segment and suggest when
it might be more appropriate to use it.

This section is motivated by an issue with the previous generation
strategy, where you only had random generation. After while, instances
using this feature would actually be unable to generate and reserve new
values, since it was taking to long to find available values. This
section looks at some of the problems with random generation that
created this situation.

#### Generating random values { #generating-random-values } 

Before using the RANDOM segment in your TextPattern, you should consider
the following problems connected to the use of RANDOM:

  - Generating values from a TextPattern with a RANDOM segment will be
    more complex than other TextPatterns

### Data entry for TextPattern based metadata { #data-entry-for-textpattern-based-metadata } 

As previously mentioned, the only metadata currently supporting
TextPattern is the tracked entity attributes. In this section, we will
describe the different ways data entry for TextPattern works, especially
for tracked entity attributes.

#### Validation of values using TextPattern { #validation-of-values-using-textpattern } 

By default, all values sent to the server for metadata using
TextPattern, will be validated. Validation can be skipped if needed, but
you should always validate input under normal circumstances. The
validation will be based on the TextPattern you have defined and will be
as strict as possible:

  - Date segments must match the same format as specified in the segment
    parameter

  - Plain text segments must match exactly

  - Text segments values must be at least as long as the format string.
    If both "^" and "$" is present, the value must match the exact
    length.

  - Generated segment values must match the format exactly, character by
    character.

When using the server to first generate and reserve values, the server
will modify the values used in the TextPattern before injecting them,
meaning you will always get a valid value when generating it on the
server.

A final exception to TextPattern validation is made for a special case:
If you change a TextPattern after reserving values for the original
pattern, values sent to the server that are invalid according to the new
TextPattern, will still be accepted if it was already reserved.

#### Different data entry flows for TextPattern { #different-data-entry-flows-for-textpattern } 

There is currently 2 ways a client can store values for TextPattern
metadata:

1.  Generating and reserving values (Apps should do this for you)

2.  Storing a custom value

The preferred way, is to generate and reserve the needed values (The
number of values generated and reserved is handled by the app). That
means each time you are seeing and storing a value, it has been
generated and reserved by the server, and will be valid.

The other way might be useful in specific cases. The user will supply
the value themselves and as long as the value supplied is valid for the
TextPattern, they can put anything they want. The caveat of doing it
this way, is that you might use values that was reserved by someone else
and if you have a SEQUENTIAL segment, the counter will not be updated.


# DHIS2 Frequently Asked Questions { #dhis2-frequently-asked-questions } 

**Q:** I have entered data into a data entry form, but I cannot see the
data in any reports (pivot tables, charts, maps). Why does data which is
entered not show up immediately in my graphs in DHIS2?

**A:** Data which is entered into DHIS2 must first be processed with the
"analytics". This means that data is not immediately available in the
analytics resources (such as reports, pivot tables, data visualizer,
GIS, etc.) after it has been entered. If scheduling is active, the
analytics process will run automatically at midnight each day. After
that, new data which was entered since the last time the analytics
process ran, will become visible.

You can trigger the analytics process manually by selecting
Reports-\>Analytics from the main menu and pressing the "Start export"
button. Note, the process may take a significant amount of time
depending on the amount of data in your database.

Otros factores que pueden afectar la visibilidad de los datos son:

  - Data approval: If data has not been approved to a level which
    corresponds to your users level, the data may not be visible to you.

  - Sharing of meta-data objects: If certain meta-data objects have not
    been shared with a user group which you are a member of, the data
    may not be visible to you.

  - Caching of analytics: In many cases, server administrators cache
    analytical objects (such as pivot tables, maps, graphs) on the
    server. If you have entered data, re-run analytics, and you are
    still not seeing any (updated) data, be sure that your data is not
    being cached by the server.

**Q:** I have downloaded DHIS2 from <https://www.dhis2.org/downloads>
but when i try to enter the system it needs a username and password.
Which should I use?

**A:** By default, the username will be "admin" and the password
"district". Usernames and passwords are case sensitive.


# Notas de lanzamiento y actualización { #release-and-upgrade-notes } 

Para obtener información actualizada sobre las últimas versiones de DHIS 2, consulte el [DHIS 2 descargas](https://www.dhis2.org/downloads) en nuestro sitio web.


