---
edit_url: "https://github.com/hisptz/unicef-apps-docs/blob/master/src/commonmark/en/content/bna/end-user-training.md"
revision_date: '2021-09-09'
tags:
- App version 1.2.2
- Použití
---

# Školení koncových uživatelů { #end-user-training } 

Důležité úkoly, které je třeba při školení koncových uživatelů zaznamenat, jsou role a odpovědnosti různých uživatelů, kteří budou s aplikací BNA komunikovat. To bude záviset na dvou faktorech, na tom, co daná osoba bude dělat, a na tom, kde se uživatel nachází.

## Určete požadované školení { #identify-required-training } 

The most common tasks required for BNA training will include, Data
analysis processing, preparing reports and other information products.
The development team should endeavour to work with stakeholders (MoH and
Unicef) to plan trainings that have an impact on the users.

App  maintenance - managing users, changes on indicators and data
elements.

## Vypracovat tréninkové strategie { #develop-training-strategies } 

### Testování přijetí uživatele { #user-acceptance-testing } 

This training is aimed at field testing the features and functions of
the BNA app. The training can be organised into two categories of users,
administrators and end-users. The purpose is to gauge the ability of
users to interact with the app and use it for bna analysis.

### Školení školitelů { #training-of-trainers } 

Part of the processes to build capacity for support and implementation
of BNA is putting in place a national core team. The ToT is aimed at
training and building the capacity of a national core team to support
BNA configuration and use at both national and lower levels.

A team of 5-10 professional staff should be identified, trained and
equipped to support the implementation.

### Workshopy a školení na místě { #workshops-and-onsite-training } 

1-2 workshops should be conducted in an effort to support bna
implementation. a) Workshop for indicator  identification and mapping,
b) Training and capacity building workshop during implementation.

 

Additionally, for lower levels such as facilities, on-site training
sessions should be conducted to facilitate hands-on exercises. The
on-site training sessions should be decentralized and preferably
conducted by the District Health Management Team (DHMT) in conjunction
with the MoH

### Mentorský a podpůrný dohled { #mentorship-and-support-supervision } 

Six-monthly onsite support supervision and training should be planned
and conducted. This will help identify gaps in the bna implementation
process and generate actions.

## Materiály a výsledky { #materials-and-outcomes } 

Materials for the bna implementation should be reviewed and developed by
the national core team. These may include the Implementation guide,
end-user and administrators guide. Were necessary, step-by-step guides
should also be developed to enhance the training sessions.

